
--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0277 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
Muscogee (CREEK) Nation 
Executive Office 
Deborah Nagle, Director 
Office of Science and Technology 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Sent via Electronic Submittal 
Re: 
Proposed Revisions to the Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights - Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791
Dear Director Nagle: 
The Muscogee (Creek) Nation (MCN) appreciates the invitation and opportunity to engage in consultation 
regarding the United States Environmental Protection Agency's (USEPA) Proposed Revisions to the 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulations to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights. Through the consultation 
process it is the goal of the MCN that meaningful discussion, progressive thought, and robust conversation 
on Tribal sovereign rights to protect the land, air, and water resources within Tribal Reservations will help 
to improve the human health and environment of ALL citizens within those Tribal Reservations. 
The MCN supports the USEPA's proposed changes to the Water Quality Standards (WQS) Regulation at 
40 CFR Part 131 "to explicitly and sustainably protect tribal reserved rights in state waters." Additionally, 
the MCN requests that the USEP A strongly considers including the requirement language of "MUST work 
with Tribal Nations in the State o f  Oklahoma" regardless of Section 10211(a) of the Safe, Accountable, 
Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act of 2005 (SAFE TEA) or similar requests from the State. This 
important requirement for Tribal input and coordination during the review process of state WQS 
submissions shall be an important step in Tribal natural resource protection and preservation within the 
MCN Reservation on issues of water quality standards and Tribal protection of reserved rights. 
Historic Background 
The MCN is a federally recognized Native American tribe in Oklahoma. The tribe's traditional homelands 
include portions of Oklahoma, Alabama, Georgia, and Florida, and their culture is closely tied to the waters 
and land of these regions. 
Before their forced removal from their homeland to Indian Territory in the 1830's, the MCN had established 
treaty rights with the United States Government that guaranteed their sovereignty, rights to their ancestral 
P. O. Box 580 Okmulgee, OK 74447-0580 1-800-482-1979

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0262 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Department of Environmental Quality 
 
 
Agency Headquarters 
 
 
700 NE Multnomah Street, Suite 600 
 
Tina Kotek, Governor 
Portland, OR  97232 
 
 
 
(503) 229-5696 
 
 
 
FAX (503) 229-6124 
 
 
TTY 711 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Water (4101M) 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Attention: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
 
The Oregon Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ) appreciates the opportunity to provide 
comments on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposal to protect tribal reserved rights in 
water quality standards. In addition to EPA’s federal tribal trust responsibilities, DEQ is committed to 
Government-to-Government consultation with tribes as relates to the establishment of WQS and other 
topics of mutual interests. We support the development of a rule to ensure that state and federal water 
quality standards will protect tribal rights. DEQ believes the proposed rule will benefit from several 
clarifications to make the rule more clear and provide a basis upon which the rule’s requirements can be 
feasibly implemented by EPA, the states, and the tribes: 
1. The rule needs to clearly define unsuppressed rights and how those will be determined. 
2. The statement in the rule requiring protection of “the health of the right holders to at least the 
same risk level as provided to the general population of the state” seems to be inconsistent with 
the explanation in EPA’s presentation provided to the states on 1/24/2023. DEQ recommends 
EPA clarifies the rule to be consistent with its presentation on 1/24/2023 as summarized below: 
• 
Establish acceptable risk (e.g., cancer risk level) for tribal members whose exercise of reserved 
rights may put them at greater risk than the general population, e.g., due to higher rates of fish 
consumption.  
• 
Specify that tribal members exercising applicable reserved rights should be exposed to no greater 
than a 1 in 100,000 cancer risk, which EPA’s guidance recommends for the general population. 
• 
Specify that the appropriate cancer risk level must be paired with an appropriate fish consumption 
rate. 
Please contact Connie Dou at (503)853- 6517 or Debra Sturdevant at 503-229-6691 if you have any 
questions regarding these comments. 
Sincerely,  
 
Connie Dou 
Water Quality Program Manager 
 
Cc: Jennifer Wigal, WQ Division Administrator 
Rian Hooff, WQ Sr. Policy Analyst 
Roxann Nayar, Tribal Liaison

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0204 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March1  
March 6, 2023 
 
Office of Science and Technology 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave, NW 
Washington DC 20460 
 
RE: 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
 
To Whom It May Concern: 
 
Maine Rivers, a Maine nonprofit organization devoted to the health 
of Maine’s rivers, submits this comment on the EPA Notification of 
Consultations and Coordination on Potential Revisions to the 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulations to protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791.  
 
The rule proposed by EPA would revise the Water Quality Standards 
at 40 CFR part 131, to create a regulatory framework that would be 
applied case-specifically to ensure protection of resources reserved 
to Tribes. 
 
Maine Rivers believes that clarity in the adoption and application of 
the federal WQCs to rivers, streams and other waters in Maine in the 
context of Tribal reserved rights would be a step forward, given the 
extensive Tribal lands in this State. We believe the key to 
compliance is transparency in the adoption of rules especially on the 
context of complex constitutional and treaty obligations. For these 
reasons, Maine Rivers supports the proposed rule. 
 
Thank you,  
 
Landis Hudson  
 
 
Chuck Verrill 
 
Landis Hudson                                             Chuck Verrill 
Executive Director                                       President 
 
 
 
 
OUR MISSION IS TO PROTECT, 
RESTORE AND ENHANCE THE 
ECOLOGICAL HEALTH OF 
MAINE’S RIVER SYSTEMS 
 
 
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR 
 
LANDIS HUDSON 
 
PROJECT MANAGER 
 
MATT STREETER 
 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 
 
CHUCK VERRILL 
PRESIDENT 
 
JEFF REARDON 
 
SECRETARY 
 
CURTIS BOHLEN 
TREASURER 
 
NICK BENNETT 
DAVID COURTEMANCH 
GREG D’AUGUSTINE 
SUSAN P. DAVIES 
DAN GAYER 
DAN KUSNIERZ 
RICK LAWRENCE 
SHARRI VENNO 
  
 
P.O. BOX 782 
YARMOUTH, ME 04096 
 
PH: 207-847-9277 
 
CONTACT@MAINERIVERS.ORG 
 
WWW.MAINERIVERS.ORG

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0157 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
To Whom It May Concern:
I thank you kindly for the opportunity to comment on the proposed rule EPA-HQ-OW-
2021-0791-0001. As an undergraduate 4th year student studying environmental science and 
conservation, my opportunities and provided course material have helped demonstrated a need to 
prompt environmental and ecological literacy that is digestible for future generations. The 
opportunity to discuss the importance of the lack of access to high-quality health-promoting 
infrastructure that has led to negative burdens on tribal communities intergenerationally is 
crucial. I would like to respond to your stated request for comment regarding Water Quality 
Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, and the continuous 
marginalization and disproportionate impacts on indigenous communities within the United 
States.
Indigenous communities around the world have significantly suffered disproportionately 
from the impacts of climate change. I have had the wonderful opportunity to discuss and learn
about environmental injustices throughout the United States in my courses and was provided the 
opportunity to learn about the struggle for justice from Dr. Sacoby Wilson. I would like to bring 
to the agency’s attention the necessary revisions in relation to water quality standards, especially 
due to the social determinant of COVID-19. The water crises that tribal communities face are a 
direct reflection of colonization and ethical inequity for BIPOC communities. Water values are a 
political construct that reflects social dynamics. Extractivisim on natural resources, the impact of 
climate change, as well as poor sanitation mean that indigenous communities no longer have 
access to safe drinking water. To dismiss the traditional lifestyles and culture of indigenous 
communities is to dismiss their health and safety as we continue to alter our planet. 
I want to mainly focus on Executive Order 13045 – the Protection of Children from 
Environmental Health and Safety Risks. Poor water quality is noted to have significant impacts 
on human health. Persistent heavy metal contaminations exist within the Navajo Nation and 
adjacent reservation boundaries. The very digestion and inhalation of their public water lead to 
hypertension, cancer, cardiovascular diseases, and much more. However, opportunities to present 
water and wastewater infrastructure improvements are lengthy and exceedingly difficult. The 
BIA requires environmental assessments to be done before a ROW is allotted. Additionally, a 
legacy of inadequate environmental enforcement contributes to the expenses and operations of 
water infrastructure. For instance, the river source water for the Crow Agency water treatment 
plant has microbial contamination – there is no agency taking responsibility for inspecting the 
home septic systems on the Reservation, and the current technology provided cannot effectively 
handle changes due to climate change. More attentive measures are necessary rather than hopeful 
writing and words. Tribes lack the legal authority to create water districts, and the lack of 
ownership of major infrastructure cannot be upgraded or replaced through grants.  It is noted that 
the budget constraints in Crow result in understaffed water/wastewater plants, repairs that go 
beyond local expertise, and other difficult roadblocks.  
In summary, the supervision of water quality and sanitation on Indigenous Peoples’ land 
is critical to improving health disparities. Domestic water access in the United States is directly 
related to structural racism and needs further protection. Maintaining effective water 
infrastructure remains limited due to financial, technical, and administrative challenges that need 

to be reviewed thoroughly to engage in protecting marginalized communities. Please see below 
for additional details and pertinent literature.
Sincerely,
A Pace University Student
Resources
Bradford, L. E., Bharadwaj, L. A., Okpalauwaekwe, U., & Waldner, C. L. (2016). Drinking 
water quality in indigenous communities in Canada and Health Outcomes: A scoping review.
International Journal of Circumpolar Health, 75(1), 32336. 
https://doi.org/10.3402/ijch.v75.32336 
Doyle, J., Kindness, L., Realbird, J., Eggers, M., & Camper, A. (2018). Challenges and 
opportunities for tribal waters: Addressing disparities in safe public drinking water on the Crow 
Reservation in Montana, USA. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public 
Health, 15(4), 567. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph15040567 
United Nations. (2022, October 14). Indigenous peoples face growing challenges to access safe 
water. OHCHR. Retrieved December 22, 2022, from 
https://www.ohchr.org/en/stories/2022/10/indigenous-peoples-face-growing-challenges-access-
safe-water 
Wilson, N. J., Montoya, T., Arseneault, R., & Curley, A. (2021). Governing water insecurity: 
Navigating indigenous water rights and regulatory politics in settler Colonial States. Water 
International, 46(6), 783–801. https://doi.org/10.1080/02508060.2021.1928972 
© Commonwealth of Australia. (n.d.). Indigenous principles for water quality. Cultural and 
Spiritual Values. Retrieved December 22, 2022, from https://www.waterquality.gov.au/anz-
guidelines/guideline-values/derive/cultural-values/principles

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0263 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
T R I B A L  P A RT N E RS H I P S      63 3  17 T H  S T RE E T ,  S UI T E  16 00     DE N VE R ,  C O  80 2 02  
 
T R I B A L P A RT N E RS H I P S @ E A RT H JU S T I C E . O R G     W W W . E A R T H JU S T I C E . O R G 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
Michael Regan, Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW  
Washington, D.C.  20460 
 
Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal at regulations.gov in Docket ID No. EPA–HQ– OW–
2021–0791 
 
Re: 
Comments on EPA Proposed Clean Water Act Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Administrator Regan: 
Earthjustice files the following comments on behalf of the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe, the 
Bay Mills Indian Community, the Quinault Indian Nation, the Red Lake Band of Chippewa 
Indians, the Chickaloon Village Traditional Council, the Orutsararmiut Native Council, and the 
Swinomish Indian Tribal Community (collectively, the “Commenters”) on the Environmental 
Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) Clean Water Act Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to 
Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (“Proposed Rule”).  87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022).  Protecting 
water quality is essential to protecting treaty rights and other reserved rights.  We strongly support 
EPA’s efforts to ensure protection of tribal reserved rights and offer the following comments for 
further consideration to help ensure effectiveness of the final rule. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
The Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe (Band) is a federally-recognized American Indian Tribe 
located in east-central Minnesota, with adjudicated reserved rights by retaining “[t]he privilege of 
hunting, fishing, and gathering the wild rice, upon the lands, the rivers and the lakes included in 
the territory ceded” in the 1837 Treaty of St. Peters (7 Stat. 536) and in the 1842 Treaty of La 
Pointe (7 Stat. 591) ceded territories in Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan.  As a member of the 
Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission (GLIFWC), the Band coordinates with other 
member tribes and with the States in co-managing treaty-protected resources.  Additionally, the 
Band’s citizens “who possess a valid Tribal identification card from a federally recognized Tribe 
located in Minnesota are deemed to have a license to harvest wild rice anywhere within the State 
of Minnesota” per Minnesota Wild Rice Regulations. 
The Bay Mills Indian Community (Bay Mills) is a federally recognized American Indian 
Tribe and part of the Anishinaabe cultural-linguistic group. The Anishinaabe have inhabited what 
is today called Michigan since time immemorial and have relied on the Great Lakes ecosystem 

 
 
2 
 
and the Straits of Mackinac for their livelihood. The 1836 Treaty of Washington, (7 Stat. 491 
(1836)), ceded vast acres of land to the United States and guaranteed Bay Mills the right to hunt, 
fish, gather, and continue living as Anishinaabe in the ceded territory. 
Quinault Indian Nation is a federally recognized Indian tribe that occupies a reservation on 
the Olympic Peninsula in Washington state that includes over 200,000 acres of mostly forested 
land, thirty miles of undeveloped Pacific Coast beach lands, and thousands of miles of rivers and 
streams.  Quinault Indian Nation is a signatory to the Treaty of Olympia (1856) in which it reserved 
the right to take fish at its “usual and accustomed fishing grounds and stations” and the privilege 
of hunting and gathering, among other rights, in exchange for ceding lands it historically roamed 
freely.  12 Stat. 971 (1856).  Stewardship of natural resources is a paramount duty for the Quinault, 
as is protection of its homelands, on which its people have lived since time immemorial.  The 
Quinault have been called the Canoe people because of the primacy of the ocean, bays, estuaries, 
and rivers to every aspect of tribal life. 
The Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians is a federally recognized Indian tribe that now 
occupies the Red Lake Reservation in Northern Minnesota. The Red Lake Reservation is the only 
closed Native American reservation in the United States, where there has never been allotment of 
tribal lands; where all land is held in common by the members; and where there is no non-Native 
ownership on the Red Lake Reservation. Red Lake also owns additional restored ceded lands in 
the approximate amount of 250,000 acres. The Band has been a party to multiple major treaties 
that impact Anishinaabe Territory, beginning with the 1825 Treaty of Prairie du Chien, the 1837 
Treaty of St. Peters, the Old Crossing Treaty of 1863, and additional treaties through 1904.  Red 
Lake members have historically depended, and continue to depend, on the natural freshwaters of 
Red Lake which lies both within the formal reservation and on ceded lands adjacent to it for their 
sustenance and economic livelihood.  Red Lake tribal members currently hunt large and small 
game, fish for many species of fish, and gather wild rice, edible plants, medicinal plants and other 
plant and animal species throughout the Red Lake Reservation, and on the lands that were ceded 
to the United States. 
Chickaloon Village Traditional Council (CVTC) is the governing body of Chickaloon 
Native Village (CNV), a federally recognized Ahtna Dene Tribal Government in Alaska that 
possesses all the inherent powers of a sovereign nation. CNV has not ceded, terminated, 
extinguished, or relinquished their original, possessory, and Indigenous rights or ancestral 
jurisdiction to any individual person, entity, or government. CNV’s ancestral territory and 
customary area of use encompasses much of Southcentral Alaska and extends from the Wrangell 
St. Elias Mountains and Copper River Watershed to the Talkeetna and Chugach Mountains and 
Upper Cook Inlet.  This territory includes countless watersheds, rivers, streams, lakes, and 
wetlands stewarded by CNV Tribal Citizens for thousands of years. CNV’s traditional area of 
influence overlaps neighboring Dena’ina Dene and Ahtna Dene federally recognized Tribes. CNV 
has a responsibility to steward and protect the environment, cultural resources, and the health of 
Tribal Citizens and community members in perpetuity.  
Orutsararmiut Native Council (ONC) is a federally recognized tribe located in the Yukon-
Kuskokwim region in Southwest Alaska. The ONC Tribal Council is the governing body of the 
Native Village of Bethel, the hub of the region. ONC’s mission is to promote the general welfare, 

 
 
3 
 
enhance independence, encourage self-sufficiency/self-motivation, enhance quality of life, and 
preserve cultural and traditional values of the Tribe, and to exercise tribal authority over resources 
through educational, economic, and social development opportunities. The Tribe is located along 
the Kuskokwim River, a resource of major cultural importance to the Tribe and the entire region. 
The ONC Tribal Council has a fundamental responsibility for protecting the ways of life and the 
health of its Tribal citizens and community members, which depend upon the region’s abundant 
fish, wildlife, and other natural resources. 
Since time immemorial, the Swinomish Indian Tribal Community and its forebears (Tribe) 
have occupied lands and waters in the northern Puget Sound region. Salmon and other fish 
(including shellfish) have played a central and enduring role in the Tribe’s subsistence, culture, 
identity and economy. In 1855, the Tribe signed the Treaty of Point Elliott with the United States. 
One of the core rights reserved by the Treaty is the right to take fish in its adjudicated usual and 
accustomed fishing areas and hunt and gather on open and unclaimed lands, which include, among 
others, the Skagit and Samish River basins and their tributaries and the lands and waters of northern 
Puget Sound. United States v. Washington, 459 F. Supp. 1020, 1049 (W.D. Wash. 1975). Water 
quality impairment harms salmon, other aquatic species, and terrestrial species and their habitats 
and therefore impairs the Tribe’s federal treaty rights.  
II. 
BACKGROUND ISSUES RELATED TO THE PROPOSED RULE  
A. 
Federal Trust Responsibility and EPA Requirements 
The federal government’s trust responsibility to tribes cannot be delegated to states or any 
other entity.  With this proposed rule, EPA makes great strides in recognizing that water quality 
can have significant impacts on tribal reserved rights and resources.  However, the proposed rule 
invites states to make determinations on tribal reserved rights.  EPA cannot delegate any of its 
duties or responsibilities that it holds under the federal trust responsibility to states or state 
agencies.  Ultimately, the duty to ensure that state water quality standards (WQS) are actually 
protective of tribal reserved rights rests with the EPA and the federal government.  A system 
involving state evaluation of whether tribal reserved rights are present in state waters, and state 
determinations of whether state WQS need to be revised to protect tribal reserved rights, inherently 
includes risk that states will make decisions on tribal reserved rights that exceed their authority, 
impermissibly curtail tribal rights, and potentially are inconsistent with federal law other state or 
tribal requirements.  EPA must ensure that it is involved throughout the entirety of the process and 
that it is not delegating final decision-making authority on tribal reserved rights to states.   
EPA has a duty to protect tribal reserved rights regardless of whether they are reserved 
expressly or implicitly, or whether they are reserved by treaty, statute, executive order, or other 
source of federal law.  Although the proposed rule includes this in the definition of a tribal reserved 
right, EPA must ensure that the implementation and application of this definition does not require 
tribes to litigate or otherwise adjudicate whether reserved rights exist, or whether those rights 
apply, if not already clear.  States cannot require a tribe to litigate or adjudicate a tribal reserved 
right as part of the process of setting WQS.   

 
 
4 
 
EPA must also clarify its role in and process for facilitating information sharing between 
tribes and states and mediating differences between tribes and states.  Historically, many tribes 
have had difficulty working with state agencies and the process can be fraught.  The proposed rule 
invites tribes to provide data or other information to be evaluated by states as they develop or 
revise state WQS.  EPA, as both federal trustee to tribes and reviewer of state WQS, must have a 
defined role in resolving potential conflicts so as to ensure that tribal reserved rights are protected 
throughout the process.   
EPA must outline how sensitive information, including Indigenous Knowledge (IK), will 
be used and protected throughout the process.  Historically, tribes have been reluctant to share data 
with states due to state disclosure laws or other state failures to protect tribal information.  We 
suggest a potential solution to this issue is that data from work performed under Clean Water Act 
Section 106 funding should be made public, even to the states, but data from work performed with 
tribal funds should be kept private, as part of a tribe’s intellectual property.  EPA should require 
states to develop protocols and procedures for how it will protect sensitive information as part of 
the process of developing or revising WQS.  Although the proposed rule suggests that EPA and 
states “should discuss in advance how the information will be shared and potentially used in the 
WQS context,” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74367, n.48, EPA must make this a requirement.  Without assured 
protections for sensitive tribal information, tribal input into state WQS development will be 
inhibited.  Federal agencies are currently in the process of seeking information about gathering, 
protecting, 
and 
applying 
IK 
to 
federal 
decision-making 
processes. 
 
See, 
e.g., 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/OSTP-CEQ-IK-Guidance.pdf.  Those 
processes and procedures can and should be followed by states to increase consistency, 
transparency and efficiency. 
B. 
Tribal Considerations 
EPA must consider the practical impacts that tribes will face throughout the process.  Tribes 
may not have readily available data, or the funding or staff necessary to gather relevant data on 
existing water quality or what level of water quality is required to protect tribal reserved rights.  
EPA must acknowledge and address this data and funding gap that tribes may face as the proposed 
rule is implemented.  EPA must also make explicit that if a tribe does not participate in the initial 
process for state revisions of WQS, that it is not later precluded from doing so.  Tribes may need 
time to gather both current and historical data to submit to EPA and states, especially on evolving 
issues such as climate change.  
C. 
Implementation and Enforcement 
EPA must clarify how it will review state implementation and enforcement of WQS 
developed to protect tribal reserved rights.  Developing WQS that protect tribal reserved rights is 
only useful if states are actually implementing and enforcing those standards.  In the past, tribes 
have had difficulty getting states to consider their requests for protection of off-reservation aquatic 
resources, and in getting states to apply those protections comprehensively.  There is potential for 
states and tribes to have conflicting data, conflicting priorities in protecting waterbodies, different 
standards for similar designated uses, and different models of how changes in water quality will 
impact tribal reserved resources.  Ideologically, states and tribes may differ on how climate change 

 
 
5 
 
will impact water resources and tribal reserved rights, and how those resources should be managed.  
States already have a mechanism through variances to avoid meeting WQS set to protect 
designated uses.  40 C.F.R. §131.14.  See also Upper Missouri Waterkeeper v. EPA, 15 F.4th 966, 
975 (9th Cir. 2021) (finding that approved variances “replace[] the base water quality standard 
with the most rigorous standard that can feasibly be attained”).  EPA must ensure that these 
mechanisms are not abused such that water quality continues to deteriorate and erode tribal 
reserved rights.  One solution is for states and tribes to co-manage waters where tribal rights exist.     
III. 
COMMENTS ON THE PROPOSED RULE 
A. 
Determining the Tribal Reserved Right 
EPA acknowledges that it may be a complex inquiry to determine if tribal rights apply in 
waters subject to state WQS, and if so, the nature of those rights and where they apply. 87 Fed. 
Reg. 74367.  EPA also acknowledges that tribal reserved rights can be derived from multiple 
sources, including treaties, statutes, executive orders, and other sources of federal law.  Id. at 
74366.  While we support EPA’s efforts to acknowledge tribal reserved rights and the need for 
protection of those rights in water and water dependent resources, EPA must also acknowledge 
that the nature and scope of those rights have often been the subject of decades-long court battles.  
In some instances, controversies have resulted in violence against tribal members attempting to 
exercise their rights.  Tribal rights to and use of off-reservation resources is an issue that is far 
from settled, and while we support EPA’s proposed rule, implementation may result in further 
controversy and litigation. 
EPA needs to recognize that determination of the scope and location of a right, as well as 
how the right is exercised, may in some areas be extremely controversial and met with state or 
inter-tribal resistance.  Tribes may have very good reasons to protect information such as cultural 
uses of certain water bodies, location of certain plants or other species, and may be averse to 
agreeing to a limited definition or scope of a right.  Establishment of a system where a state 
government attempts to define, at least in part, the scope of a tribal treaty right, may well have 
unintended negative consequences, including inconsistency with federal law or federal 
adjudications.  Often, tribal rights have been diminished or curtailed by state actors, and it may be 
difficult for tribes, particularly small tribes or those that are not well-resourced, to enter into 
protracted negotiations with state officials in the event of a disagreement between state and tribal 
officials as to the scope, location and nature of a right.  EPA should consider providing a dispute 
resolution mechanism, policy or set of guidelines for when states and tribes disagree as to the 
scope, location and type of tribal reserved right, and the level of protections required to protect 
those rights and resources.  Minor modifications to the dispute resolution provisions at 40 C.F.R. 
§ 131.7 could potentially provide a solution to this issue. 
We also note the possibility that the tribal outreach process could differ state by state.  EPA 
should require a certain minimum threshold for states engaging in outreach to right holders, such 
as requiring states to adhere to a certain uniform process or policy for outreach and recordkeeping 
requirements.  Requiring a uniform process will help to ensure consideration of tribal reserved 
rights even if a state government is hostile to tribal rights.  This will also make the process more 
efficient for right holders in the event that submissions to multiple states are necessary. This will 

 
 
6 
 
also help to minimize incidences where state political changes result in changes to the level or 
scope of protection for tribal reserved rights. 
In addition to the rights to hunt, fish, and gather, tribal reserved rights may include 
agricultural, ceremonial and cultural uses.  We also note that the canons of construction of Indian 
law dictate that EPA must consider that tribes likely believed at the time treaties were signed that 
the reserved resources would be useable – i.e., fish that are safe to eat, water that is safe to drink 
and bathe in, and plants that are not genetically modified. See, e.g., U.S. v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371 
(1905); Washington v. Washington State Commercial Passenger Fishing Vessel Ass’n, 443 U.S. 
658 (1979).  
B. 
Determining the Level of Water Quality 
1. 
Information Related to Unsuppressed Use 
EPA proposes to require that state WQS, to the extent supported by available data and 
information, be established to protect the exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water 
quality or availability of the resource.  EPA requests comment on whether additional language 
should be included in the final rule specifying the considerations for determining unsuppressed 
WQS.  
States should be required to consider available data and information including tribally 
produced historical data about resource abundance and location, historical and current tribal uses 
of resources, and Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK).  In considering the information 
underlying the WQS, EPA should give equal weight to tribally produced data, articles, or reports.  
This includes TEK or other forms of IK that may not have been considered or included in previous 
state reviews of WQS.  EPA must also weigh tribally produced data, information, or reports equally 
with state-produced data or information when resolving conflicts.  
As mentioned above, federal agencies currently are developing best practices for obtaining, 
protecting, and applying IK to federal decision-making.  States should be required to follow a 
standard process for investigating, keeping and applying IK in a way that is protected and is 
consistent with the federal standards developed.  Without a standard process or procedure, tribes 
may be reluctant to commit the time and resources necessary to gather and provide sensitive 
information to states, particularly if there is no guarantee that sensitive cultural information will 
be protected from Freedom of Information Act requests, that tribal information and knowledge 
will be appropriately considered applied, or that tribally compiled data will not be rejected as 
unusable or minimized.  Thus, it is important for tribes and states to have a common understanding 
of how information will be gathered, protected, and applied in this process, and for that process to 
be uniform across the states. 
Monitoring and year-over-year data gathering needed to establish appropriately protective 
WQS is a long-term and potentially costly process.  Meaningful tribal involvement will require 
staff and resources to ensure tribes have the ability to engage over the long term.  Establishing 
protective WQS has the potential to be particularly complex if there is a goal of reestablishing uses 
lost due to pollution or degradation or restoring damaged or diminished resources.  EPA should 

 
 
7 
 
consider, and provide, the level of support in terms of staffing, funding and research that will be 
necessary for tribes to fully participate in the development of adequately protective WQS.  
Similarly, states should be required to provide relevant information to tribes as needed when doing 
so will assist in the process of WQS development necessary for protection of reserved rights and 
restoration of resources to a level that will support the exercise of those rights.  
EPA has stated that where information is conflicting, there are gaps in information and/or 
a difference of opinion exists between the state and one or more tribes about the level of water 
quality necessary to protect a reserved right, EPA will take action based on the best available 
information in the same way that EPA currently makes WQS decisions in these circumstances in 
other contexts, e.g., determining whether criteria are scientifically defensible in situations where 
there is conflicting science, there are gaps in the science, and/or there are different conclusions 
among stakeholders.  When making decisions under these circumstances, EPA also should 
consider the extent to which the tribal reserved rights have already been diminished, the years and 
decades where tribals citizens were prevented from exercising reserved rights, the tribes whose 
rights were terminated or not federally recognized, and take into consideration the circumstances 
surrounding the conflicting information or why informational gaps exist.  EPA should err on the 
side of protectiveness and restoration of a resource, as contemplated by the CWA itself. 
EPA notes that there may be situations where existing water quality is lower than necessary 
to allow for right holders to fully exercise their tribal reserved rights.  87 Fed. Reg. 74368.  EPA 
also notes that an unsuppressed level should balance heritage use of a resource with what is 
currently reasonably achievable for a particular waterbody.  Id. at 74369.  States and tribes may 
differ with regard to what is currently reasonably achievable.  Tribal cultural practices and resource 
management approaches often dictate a longer-term and more comprehensive approach than those 
selected by state or federal governments.  Tribal practices may emphasize preservation of a 
resource over development or economic use of a resource.  Tribal preferences may be to avoid 
degradation of water or water-dependent resources at all costs.  Accordingly, this could be an area 
of ongoing controversy or disagreement between state and tribal governments that share rights to 
certain resources. 
Where feasible, state and tribal co-management of aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources 
could be the most fruitful and efficient approach to protection and restoration of waters and 
resources that have been degraded or damaged to the point where tribal uses are no longer being 
practiced.  For example, this approach may be successful for specific areas or shared waterbodies.  
EPA also should consider co-management frameworks where multiple tribes have reserved rights 
to a waterbody, or where tribes have rights to inter-state resources or waterbodies.  For example, 
for GLIFWC member tribes, limited co-management is already exercised in accordance to the 
Voigt Decision.  Lac Courte Oreilles (LCO) v. Voigt (LCO I), 700 F.2d 341, 365 (7th Cir. 1983).  
However, the tribal role in co-management may be increased, as equity in co-management has the 
potential to encourage efficiency and a common approach to protecting the health of the entire 
watershed. 

 
 
8 
 
2. 
Health Criteria 
Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(2) would require that the health of right holders be protected 
to at least the same risk level as the general population of the state would have been protected, had 
the general population been the “target population” for water quality protections in the waters at 
issue.  EPA anticipates the primary application of this provision to be in using a cancer risk level 
appropriate for a general population, i.e., at least 10-5, along with a fish consumption rate that 
reflects the reserved right for the purpose of calculating human health criteria.  
We support a practice of erring on the side of protectiveness, particularly if EPA is 
requiring WQS to be set at a level to protect unsuppressed use of a resource by right holders.  EPA 
must consider that some tribal or subsistence-based practices result in exposure to toxins from 
multiple pathways.  Uses in addition to hunting, fishing and gathering include cultural, ceremonial 
and agricultural uses—for example, bathing, drinking or engaging in ceremonies at certain waters 
or with certain species.  Accordingly, a 10-6 acceptable cancer risk rate with an appropriate fish 
consumption rate may be more appropriate.  We also encourage EPA to require consideration of 
these circumstances and uses in any future updates or revisions to the EPA 2000 Methodology for 
Deriving Ambient Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human Health; the National 
Environmental Justice Advisory Council 2002 publication Fish Consumption and Environmental 
Justice; and the 1985 Guidelines for Deriving Numerical National Water Quality Criteria for the 
Protection of Aquatic Organisms and Their Uses. 
C. 
Revising Water Quality Standards 
The proposed rule provides three options for states to revise WQS if needed to ensure 
protection of tribal reserved rights via designated uses, protective criteria, or antidegradation 
provisions.  The final rule should reflect that the preferred avenue for states to protect tribal 
reserved rights is by adopting designated uses specific to tribal reserved rights.  Establishing 
designated uses that clearly encompass tribal reserved rights ensures that states are actively 
considering tribal reserved rights as part of their water quality programs, rather than assuming that 
tribal reserved rights will be considered under some other designated use(s).  Even if attainment is 
not currently feasible, the states can still set designated uses as aspirational.  Indeed, the purpose 
of the CWA is to restore and revive water bodies and states must actively work towards that goal.   
In establishing designated uses specific to tribal reserved rights, states should also consider 
adopting or incorporating designated uses that tribes may have established as part of their own 
EPA approved WQS.  EPA should also weigh tribal designated uses when reviewing state WQS 
as part of the determination of whether the proposed state WQS are protective of tribal reserved 
rights.  Tribes with EPA-approved programs may have already collected data necessary to protect 
important or relevant resources.   
States may also adopt protective criteria but can do so in addition to adopting a designated 
use protective of tribal reserved rights.  Associating protective criteria with an already existing 
designated use may not ensure that tribal reserved rights are specifically contemplated and 
protected throughout the state process.  EPA should not allow states to rely solely on 
antidegradation policy options as a mechanism to protect tribal reserved rights in lieu of 

 
 
9 
 
establishing tribal reserved rights designated uses.  States are already required to have 
antidegradation policies in place to ensure that state water quality does not backslide.  Adopting 
designated uses that focus specifically on tribal rights would help ensure that tribal resources are 
protected through state programs, including through antidegradation measures.  
EPA has requested comments on whether and how states can revise designated uses, as 
provided by § 131.10, while also ensuring the protection of tribal reserved rights.  We recommend 
adding language to § 131.9 stating that a state may not remove a use where a waterbody is subject 
to tribal reserved rights unless it can demonstrate that all tribes whose rights are impacted consent 
in writing to removal of the use, and that any tribal consent to the removal of the use may include 
conditions (e.g., revisiting the use attainability analysis at regular intervals, revitalization efforts 
for other waterbodies or resources, co-management, or other collaborative efforts).  We also 
recommend that language should be added to § 131.9 stating that a state must demonstrate that 
where it seeks to apply a variance under § 131.14 or permit compliance schedule under § 131.15 
impacting tribal reserved rights, the state has conducted timely outreach efforts to tribes whose 
rights are impacted, obtained written consent from the tribe(s), and has implemented reasonable 
conditions as requested by the right holders.  The state or the right holder should have a provision 
to be able to seek EPA involvement and final approval. 
IV. 
OTHER ISSUES 
EPA recognizes its obligations to work with both federally recognized tribes and all other 
Indigenous peoples.  87 Fed. Reg. 74377, n.88.  Accordingly, the definition of “Indian Tribe” at 
40 C.F.R. § 131.3(l), “any Indian Tribe, band, group, or community recognized by the Secretary 
of the Interior and exercising governmental authority over a Federal Indian reservation,” should 
be revised because there are federally recognized tribes and Indigenous groups who do not have 
governmental authority over a Federal Indian reservation but who may nevertheless retain use 
rights entitled to protection under the proposed rule.   
We note that the bulk of the tribal responses to comments on EPA’s initial request for 
comment and tribal consultation pertain to regions where tribal off-reservation treaty rights have 
already been adjudicated.  However, there are a number of states where tribes or Indigenous 
communities exist whose off-reservation use rights have not been adjudicated, whose treaties were 
not ratified, and whose uses have not been protected by states. Further, even in states where off-
reservation treaty rights have been adjudicated, not all areas of the state may have been 
adjudicated.  Those rights and uses are still entitled to protection under the CWA. 
Per 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(f) and § 131.12(a)(2), any use actually attained in a water body on 
or after November 28, 1975 is entitled to protection.  The fact that tribal uses have not been 
recognized or protected by states does not negate the existing rule, and the proposed rule only 
highlights that both existing and historical uses of state-regulated waters by Indigenous people 
must be recognized and incorporated into state WQS.  
 
 
 

 
 
10 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Gussie Lord 
 
 
 
 
 
Stefanie Tsosie 
Managing Attorney, Tribal Partnerships 
 
Staff Attorney, Tribal Partnerships 
Earthjustice 
 
 
 
 
 
Earthjustice 
 
 
 
 
Signatories: 
 
 
Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe 
 
 
 
Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians 
 
Bay Mills Indian Community  
 
 
Chickaloon Village Traditional Council 
 
Quinault Indian Nation 
 
 
 
Orutsararmiut Native Council 
 
Swinomish Indian Tribal Community

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0176 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
AARON M. FREY 
ATTORNEY GENERAL 
REGIONAL OFFICES 
84 HARLOW ST. 2ND FLOOR 
BANGOR, MAINE 04401 
TEL: (207) 941-3070 
FAX: (207) 941-3075 
125 PRESUMPSCOT ST., SUITE 26 
PORTLAND, MAINE 04103 
TEL: (207) 822-0260 
FAX: (207) 822-0259 
14 ACCESS HIGHWAY, STE. 1 
CARIBOU, MAINE 04736 
TEL: (207) 496-3792 
FAX: (207) 496-3291 
TEL: (207) 626-8800 
TTY USERS CALL MAINE RELAY 711 
STATE OF MAINE 
OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
6 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 0 4333-0 0 0 6 
February 22, 2023 
Via Regular US. Mail and 
Federal eRulemaking Portal 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center, Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
https://www.regulations.gov/ 
RE: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
On December 5, 2022, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published its 
Proposed Rule on Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions To Protect Tribal Reserved 
Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Tribal Rights Rule). The proposed Tribal Rights Rule would apply 
to all states, including Maine, that administer or oversee water quality programs. It sets forth a 
new uniform regulatory approach requiring the protection of tribal reserved rights and 
contemplates consideration and implementation by states of new or revised provisions in their 
water quality standards (WQS). 
Application of the Tribal Rights Rule, which adopts a similar approach to the one EPA 
abandoned in prior WQS litigation with the State, in Maine is both unnecessary and ineffective. 
The State of Maine, through a productive collaboration with EPA and the federally recognized 
tribes in Maine,1  and as a matter of voluntary state environmental regulatory policy, has already 
adopted similar state law provisions that were approved by EPA Region 1. These Maine WQS 
' There are four federally recognized Indian tribes in Maine: the Penobscot Nation; the Passamaquoddy 
Tribe (with separate governing bodies at Indian Township and Pleasant Point); the Houlton Band of 
Maliseet Indians (Houlton Band); and the Mi'kmaq Nation (formerly known as the Aroostook Band of 
Micmac Indians) (collectively, the Tribes). 

Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
February 22, 2023 
Page 2  
establish a designated use of sustenance fishing that "protects human consumption of fish for 
nutritional and cultural purposes," P.L. 2019, ch. 463, § 4 (effective Sept. 18, 2019), in specified 
Maine waters as part of Maine's EPA-approved water classification system, 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 464-
470 (Supp. 2022). See P.L. 2019, ch. 463 (An Act To Protect Sustenance Fishing); 38 M.R.S.A. 
§ 466-A (sustenance fishing designated use); 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 467(7)(A)(1)-(3) & (5), (7)(B)(1)(b)-
(d), (7)(D)(2)(d), (13)(A)(1)-(2), (13)(B)(2) & (5), (15)(A)(1), (15)(C)(1)(a)-(f), (15)(F)(5) (Supp. 
2022) (designating sustenance fishing use in water bodies in the Penobscot River, St. Croix River, 
and St. John River Basins). 
I submit these comments with the goal of preserving the improved working relationship 
between Maine, EPA Region 1, and the Tribes, and to emphasize that Maine's existing EPA-
approved sustenance fishing WQS would comply with all aspects of EPA's proposed Tribal Rights 
Rule and fully protect all tribal sustenance fishing rights in Maine. The proposed Tribal Rights 
Rule would not, in any event, have any legal force in Maine under the unique tribal-state 
relationship set forth in Maine's governing state and federal Indian settlement acts. Rather than 
dwell on this jurisdictional component of the settlement acts, which has recently become divisive, 
I ask EPA to clarify that, assuming the Tribal Rights Rule could even apply in Maine (which the 
State disputes), Maine's existing sustenance fishing WQS would comply with all aspects of the 
Tribal Rights Rule and fully protect all tribal sustenance rights in Maine for all purposes. This 
clarification would reaffirm EPA's approval of Maine's sustenance fishing WQS, which led to the 
resolution of lengthy litigation between Maine and EPA on issues similar to those presented in the 
Tribal Rights Rule and that EPA abandoned. 
The Maine Settlement Acts are unique.
 Maine has a nationally unique tribal-state 
relationship set forth in two statutes: the Maine Implementing Act (MIA), 30 M.R.S. §§ 6201-
6214 (2011 & Supp. 2022), and the Maine Indian Land Claims Settlement Act (MICSA), 25 U.S.C. 
§§ 1721-1735 (MICSA)2  (collectively, the Settlement Acts). The purposes of the Settlement Acts 
were to resolve fully and finally all tribal land claims and define in statute the jurisdictional 
relationship between the State and the Tribes. 25 U.S.C. § 1721(b); 30 M.R.S. § 6202. To this 
end, MIA reflects a comprehensive negotiated settlement of tribal land claims against the State 
that establishes the general application of state law on tribal lands and delineates the areas of tribal 
jurisdiction.3
 See Maine v. Johnson, 498 F.3d 37, 41-42 (1st Cir. 2007) (history of Settlement 
2  MICSA, Pub. L. No. 96-420, 94 Stat. 1785 (1980), was foirnerly codified at 25 U.S.C. §§ 1721-
1735. MICSA and other federal settlement acts remain in effect but were removed from the United States 
Code as of 25 U.S.C. Supp. IV (September 2016). For simplicity, reference is made to MICSA's sections 
as previously codified. 
3  Under the Settlement Acts, the Houlton Band and its lands and natural resources are fully subject to all 
Maine laws to the same extent as other citizens and lands and resources, while the Penobscot Nation and 
Passamaquoddy Tribes and their lands and resources are subject to Maine law except as otherwise 
provided by MIA. 25 U.S.C. §§ 1721(b), 1725(a); 30 M.R.S. §§ 6202, 6204. In 1989, Maine enacted the 
Micmac Settlement Act, 30 M.R.S. §§ 7201-7207, which Congress ratified in 1991 through the 

Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
February 22, 2023 
Page 3  
Acts); Aroostook Band of Micmacs v. Ryan, 484 F.3d 41, 44-47 (1st Cir. 2007) (same). Congress 
subsequently enacted MICSA, which, ratified MIA, extinguished all current and potential land 
claims by the Tribes, discharged and released the State from all treaty obligations,4  and established 
a land acquisition fund and a settlement fund to benefit the Penobscot Nation, the Passamaquoddy 
Tribe, and the Houlton Band.5 
Pursuant to the Settlement Acts, Maine has statewide environmental regulatory jurisdiction 
and authority, including in all tribal areas, and the State's laws regulating the environment and 
natural resources apply uniformly and without exception to the Tribes and their members, lands, 
and natural resources to the same extent as any other Maine citizens, lands, and natural resources.6 
30 M.R.S. §§ 6202, 6204; 25 U.S.C. §§ 1721(b), 1725(a). In addition, MICSA contains provisions 
that ensure that no existing or future federal laws would apply or be interpreted in a way that might 
call into question such uniform applicability of Maine's laws in tribal areas. 25 U.S.C. §§ 1725(h), 
1735(b).7  The effect of these provisions is to bar application of any federal law, including the 
Aroostook Band of Micmacs Settlement Act, Pub. L. No. 102-171, 105 Stat. 1143 (1991) (ABMSA). 
Aroostook Band, 484 F.3d at 45-46. These acts treat the Mi'kmaq Nation the same as the Houlton Band 
under the Settlement Acts. Id. at 58 n.20; ABMSA, § 2(a)(5). 
4  25 U.S.C. § 1731; see also Penobscot Nation v. Frey, 3 F.4th 484, 498 (1st Cir. 2021) (en banc). 
5  See Penobscot Nation v. Georgia-Pacific Corp., 254 F.3d 317, 320 (1st Cir. 2001) (Settlement Acts 
resolved disputed land claims); Passamaquoddy Tribe v. Maine, 75 F.3d 784, 787 (1st Cir. 1996) 
(MICSA confirmed title to reservation lands, memorialized federal tribal recognition, and "opened the 
floodgate for the influx of millions of dollars in federal subsidies"); Maine v. Johnson, 498 F.3d 37, 43 
(1st Cir. 2007) (Settlement Acts were "a compromise by which land claims were limited, federal funds 
paid over, and the authority of the tribes and the State redefined on a new basis, closer to Maine's 
historic" relationship with the tribes in Maine). 
6  The First Circuit Court of Appeals, in analyzing MICSA's legislative history, has observed: "The Senate 
Report, adopted by the House Report, declared that 'State law, including but not limited to laws 
regulating land use or management, conservation and environmental protection, are fully applicable as 
provided in [the proposed bill] and Section 6204 of the Maine Implementing Act.'" Johnson, 498 F.3d at 
44 (quoting S. Rep. No. 96-957, at 27 (1980) and H.R. Rep. No. 96-1353, at 20 (1980)). 
7 25 U.S.C. § 1725(h) provides that 
no law or regulation of the United States (1) which accords or relates to a special status or 
right of or to any Indian, Indian nation, tribe or band of Indians, Indian lands, Indian 
reseivations, Indian country, Indian territory, or land held in trust for Indians, and also (2) 
which affects or preempts the civil, criminal, or regulatory jurisdiction of the State of 
Maine, including, without limitation, laws of the State relating to land use or environmental 
matters, shall apply within the State." 
25 U.S.C. § 1735(b) provides that 
[t]he provisions of any Federal law enacted after October 10, 1980, for the benefit of 
Indians, Indian nations, or tribes or bands of Indians, which would affect or preempt the 
application of the laws of the State of Maine, including application of the laws of the State 

Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
February 22, 2023 
Page 4  
proposed Tribal Rights Rule, that gives special heightened status, rights, or protections to the 
Tribes or their members unless Congress specifically makes such law applicable in Maine. 
Pursuant to the Settlement Acts, members of the Penobscot Nation and Passamaquoddy 
Tribes have the right to take fish for their individual sustenance within their respective 
reservations. 30 M.R.S. § 6207(4). This right is a limited exemption within such reservations only 
from otherwise applicable fish and game regulations on matters such as the "method, manner, bag 
and size limits and season for fishing," 30 M.R.S. § 6207(3), and creates no entitlement to any 
particular quality or quantity of fish. Members of the Houlton Band and Mi'kmaq Nation have no 
such rights. See n.3. 
Maine's existing sustenance fishing WQS would comply with the Tribal Rights Rule.  In 
2019, Maine enacted 38 M.R.S. §§ 466-A, 466(10-A),8  which established a new sustenance fishing 
designated use as a subcategory of the applicable fishing designated use within Maine's existing 
water classification system, 38 M.R.S. §§ 464-470. P.L 2019, ch. 463; see also Comm. Amend. 
A to L.D. 1775, Statement of Fact, No. H-490 (129th Legis. 2019) (attached as Exhibit 1). This 
groundbreaking legislation (L.D. 1775) was spearheaded by the Commissioner of the Maine 
Department of Environmental Protection (ME DEP) with representation and support from my 
office's Natural Resources Division. The process of developing L.D. 1775 involved regular 
meetings and extensive collaboration with representatives of each of the Tribes, EPA, and their 
respective counsel. The language of L.D. 1775 was carefully drafted to create the most stringent 
sustenance fishing protections of any state in all Maine waters of significance to the Tribes. The 
legislation received widespread public and political support and was enacted with significant 
majorities in both houses of the Maine Legislature. See  LD 1775, HP 1262, Text and Status, 129th 
Legislature, First Regular Session (mainelegislature.org)  (last visited, Jan. 24, 2023); supporting 
testimony of ME DEP Commissioner Gerald Reid (attached as Exhibit 2). 
EPA Region 1 approved Maine's new sustenance fishing WQS set forth in 38 M.R.S.A. § 
466-A by letter dated November 6, 2019 (attached as Exhibit 3). As approved, the new sustenance 
fishing designated use is deemed protected for all purposes through water quality criteria for 
human health (HHC) established by the ME DEP. 38 M.R.S. § 466-A(1)-(2). In February 2020, 
the ME DEP, through the Maine Board of Environmental Protection (BEP), promulgated new and 
to lands owned by or held in trust for Indians, or Indian nations, tribes, or bands of Indians, 
as provided in this subchapter and the Maine Implementing Act, shall not apply within the 
State of Maine, unless such provision of such subsequently enacted Federal law is 
specifically made applicable within the State of Maine." 
Congress has not specifically made any Clean Water Act tribal provision applicable in Maine. 
In MICSA, Congress permitted the State to amend MIA in defined ways with respect to the Penobscot 
Nation and the Passamaquoddy Tribe with those Tribes' agreement. 25 U.S.C. § 1735(e)(1). The new 
sustenance fishing designated use in Maine's water classiftcation system in Title 38 did not require or 
utilize an amendment to MIA. 

Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
February 22, 2023 
Page 5  
revised HHC in state regulations, 06-096 C.M.R. ch. 584. By letter dated June 23, 2020 (attached 
as Exhibit 4), EPA Region 1 approved these new and revised HHC WQS consistent with the CWA. 
By letter dated May 27, 2020 (attached as Exhibit 5), EPA Region 1 withdrew certain 2015 WQS 
decisions that had spawned years of litigation between EPA, Maine, and the Tribes over sustenance 
fishing in the context of the Settlement Acts. By collaborating on the development of Maine's 
new sustenance fishing WQS, the parties to that dispute were able to put differences aside and 
work productively toward a common environmental goal. 
Maine's EPA-approved sustenance fishing WQS created by this groundbreaking joint 
effort would comply with all aspects of EPA's proposed Tribal Rights Rule, if finalized and 
assuming it had force in Maine, and would fully protect all tribal sustenance rights in Maine for 
all purposes. I ask that EPA expressly include such a written clarifying statement with respect to 
Maine's existing sustenance fishing WQC protections in EPA's response to comments, which 
would preserve the vastly improved working relationship in Maine and help prevent further 
disputes and a backslide into litigation. 
The Tribal Rights Rule would not apply in Maine. EPA's Tribal Rights Rule represents a 
proposed "uniform approach for establishment of WQS" with respect to tribal rights through 
"rulemaking rather than during review of individual state action" on a case-by-case basis in response 
to individual state WQS submissions. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74366. Such an approach is antithetical to 
core provisions of the Settlement Acts. Under the Acts, Maine has statewide environmental 
regulatory jurisdiction, including in all tribal areas, and the State's environmental and natural 
resource laws apply uniformly to the Tribes and their members, lands, and natural resources to the 
same extent as any other Maine citizens, lands, and natural resources. 30 M.R.S. §§ 6202, 6204; 
25 U.S.C. §§ 1721(b), 1725(a); Johnson, 498 F.3d at 42-46 (affirming Maine's statewide 
environmental regulatory jurisdiction). The proposed Tribal Rights Rule, however, creates a new 
tribal-specific framework that, most prominently with the addition of proposed § 131.9, requires 
state protection of tribal reserved rights and may require new or revised state WQS to protect such 
rights. This is contrary to the Settlement Act provisions requiring the uniform application of 
Maine's environmental and natural resource laws without regard to tribal status. 
It is also contrary to additional MICSA provisions that would bar application of the entirety 
of the Tribal Rights Rule with respect to Maine. The rule's new uniform regulatory approach to 
evaluating tribal rights would create special and heightened status, rights, and protections for the 
Tribes and their members, and Congress has not specifically made such provisions applicable in 
Maine. 25 U.S.C. §§ 1725(h), 1735(b).9  Moreover, any new or revised Maine WQS that EPA 
9  Specific aspects of the Tribal Rights Rule that are contrary to core provisions of the Settlement Acts and 
would not apply in Maine include the following: the new broad definitions of"tribal reserved rights" and 
"right holders" in proposed § 13 1.3(r)-(s); the expansion of EPA's authority with respect to state WQS in 
proposed § 13 1.5(a)(9) and in the proposed revisions to § 13 1.5(b); the expanded minimum requirements 
for WQS submissions in proposed § 13 1.6(g); all aspects of the proposed new § 13 1.9 regarding the 

Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
February 22, 2023 
Page 6  
might at some point determine is necessary under the CWA based on the Tribal Rights Rule would 
also run afoul of these Settlement Act provisions. If EPA proceeds with the rule, it should 
recognize the uniform nature of all state environmental and natural resource regulation in Maine, 
and that the regulation of the Tribes and their members, lands and resources in Maine is subject to 
a different legal framework governed by the Settlement Acts, and not the Tribal Rights Rule. 
I am thankful that the State of Maine, EPA Region 1, and the Tribes have worked to set 
aside their differences, moved past their divisive WQS litigation, and are now working together 
productively towards shared environmental goals. I consider the reset of these vital working 
relationships to be a major success, and it would be displeasing to see any steps backward. If EPA 
proceeds with its Tribal Rights Rule, I ask that it take care to preserve this forward momentum and 
clarify that, assuming the Tribal Rights Rule could even apply in Maine under the Settlement Acts, 
Maine's existing EPA-approved sustenance fishing WQS would comply with all aspects of the 
Tribal Rights Rule and fully protect all tribal sustenance rights in Maine for all purposes and that 
no further action will be required. Thank you for your consideration. 
Sincerely, 
401 
aron M. Frey
 fe4.u 7  
Attorney General 
protection of tribal reserved rights; and the proposed revisions to state triennial review provisions and 
requirements in § 131.20(a).

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0292 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
NORTH 
Dakota 
Environmental Quality 
Be Legendary.-
March 3, 2023 
Michael S. Regan 
Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave NW, Suite 1101A 
Washington, DC 20460 
Submitted Electronically via Regulations.gov 
RE: 
Comments on the Proposed Rulemaking Titled "Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions To Protect Tribal Reserved Rights" (Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-
OW-2021-0791) 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
The North Dakota Department of Environmental Quality' (NDDEQ) appreciates the opportunity 
to comment on the proposed revisions to the Water Quality Standards (40 C.F.R. pt. 131) to protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights. See 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (proposed Dec. 5, 2022) (to be codified at 40 
C.F.R. pt. 131) (Proposed Rule). NDDEQ, which has the authority for implementing North 
Dakota's Water Quality Standards (WQS) as required by 33 U.S.C. § 1313, supports engaging 
tribes in the standard-setting process. However, the Proposed Rule is not the appropriate 
mechanism to do so. It will not "provide clarity, transparency, and predictability" but will instead 
create confusion and chaos. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74366. 
NDDEQ therefore requests that the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) reject the Proposed Rule. 
I. 
The Proposed Rule cannot be implemented. 
The Proposed Rule cannot be implemented because the foundational step of the rule is impossible 
to execute. Under the Proposed Rule, states must first determine if tribal reserved rights apply in 
waters subject to state WQS. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74367. EPA acknowledges that this "may be a 
complex inquiry," but fails to recognize that making this determination is beyond the scope of 
authority and outside the expertise of both EPA and NDDEQ. Id. NDDEQ is not aware of anything 
in the Clean Water Act (CWA), 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., that gives it — or EPA — the authority to 
determine tribal reserved rights. NDDEQ and EPA are environmental experts, not Indian law 
experts. 
Treaty rights are socially, politically, and legally complex issues. EPA's overly simplistic directive 
that states should just ask the right holder ignores the reality that states may have no idea who 
possible right holders are, particularly for tribes that are no longer located in the state, and that 
NDDEQ also supports and joins the comments submitted by the Association of Clean Water 
Administrators. 
4201 Normandy Street 
l 
Bismarck ND 58503-1324 
J
 Fax 701-328-5200 
l 
deq.nd.gov 
Directors Office 
Division of 
Division of 
Division of 
Division of 
Division of Chemistry 
701-328-5150 
Air Quality 
Municipal Facilities 
Waste Management 
Water Quality 
701-328-6140 
701-328-5188 
701-328-5211 
701-328-5166 
701-328-5210 
2635 East Main Ave 
Bismarck ND 58501 

there could be disagreement between parties over who holds which rights. See 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74367. During the tribal consultation period, tribes also expressed concerns with the process of 
determining tribal reserved rights. EPA, Summary Report of Tribal Consultation for the Proposed 
Rule: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (Oct. 
2021),https ://www.epa. gov/system/files/documents/2022-1 1/summary-report-trib al-consultation-
proposed-rule-wqs.pdf. Neither EPA nor NDDEQ is the proper entity to make a determination in 
the event of a treaty dispute. 
Not only would the Proposed Rule require NDDEQ to undertake a task certain to fail, but it would 
also harm the relationship between the State of North Dakota and the tribes. NDDEQ strives to 
have a good working relationship with its tribal counterparts. Putting NDDEQ in the middle of 
possible treaty disputes would injure this relationship. The Proposed Rule will harm state-tribal 
relations. 
11. 
The Proposed Rule is unnecessary. 
When developing WQS, NDDEQ already determines the level of water quality necessary to 
protect aquatic life and users of the resource. See 40 C.F.R. § 131.6. Like all states, NDDEQ 
conducts a triennial review of its WQS that includes the opportunity for public comment. See 40 
C.F.R. § 131.20. If NDDEQ is aware of a tribal reserved right, it will ensure that use is protected 
during its triennial review of its WQS. If there is a tribal reserved right that NDDEQ is unaware 
of, a right holder can bring that to NDDEQ's attention during the triennial review or by simply 
contacting NDDEQ. 
As EPA recognizes, "fflor many aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources that tribes have rights 
to fish, hunt or gather, the existing Federal WQS regulations already require states to provide a 
level of protection consistent with this proposed rulemaking." 87 Fed. Reg. at 74370. EPA 
identifies two categories that may require revisions to a state's WQS: fish consumers and wild 
rice. Id. at 74371. But it is not necessary to revise the existing Federal WQS regulations to address 
these two circumstances. If a population is more vulnerable due to cultural difference (e.g., above 
average consumption of aquatic organisms) or physically (e.g., child, youth, or sex), there is 
authority under 40 C.F.R. § 131.4(a) to write WQS more stringent than required by CWA Sections 
101(a)(2) or 304(a). 
In its Proposed Rule, which requires that WQS must protect the health of the right holders to the 
same risk level as provided to the general population of the state, EPA gives the impression that it 
does not believe states develop WQS protective of everyone regardless of their geographic 
location. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74366. This is inaccurate and disrespectful to state partners. 
III. 
The Proposed Rule is an unfunded mandate. 
EPA states, "[t]his action does not contain any unfunded mandate as described in [the Unfunded 
Mandates Reform Act] UMRA, 2 U.S.C. 1531-1538 . . . ." Id. at 74375. However, if adopted the 
2 

proposed revisions and additions to 40 C.F.R. pt. 131 would require investing a substantial increase 
of labor and expertise in the WQS review process, with no mechanism to pay for it. 
For example, as proposed, the revisions would require: (1) the state to determine if a Tribal 
Reserved Right applies to a state water; (2) the nature of the right (i.e., a fishing right, a hunting 
right, a resource gathering right); (3) where the right applies (i.e., to a specific set of waterbodies 
or to waters generally within a broad geographic area); and (4) how the right is exercised by the 
right holders (e.g., for subsistence purposes). 
States would then have to develop WQS to protect any tribal reserved rights that were determined 
to be applicable. This would require determining the level of water quality necessary to protect 
users of the resource and/or the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource itself, based on available 
data. This level of water quality is to be determined by applying proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(1) 
& (2) by requiring the state to: (1) determine the level of water quality needed to protect the right; 
(2) accounting for suppression effects and protecting right holders to the same risk levels as the 
general population. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74366. 
IV. 
Conclusion 
NDDEQ urges EPA to reject the Proposed Rule. The Proposed Rule cannot be implemented, and 
is unnecessary and unfunded. Where tribal reserved rights require additional consideration of the 
appropriate WQS for relevant waters, EPA should work with the states and tribes, using the 
existing tools available under the Federal WQS regulations. 
Sincerely, 
L. David Glatt, 
Director 
LDG:kmm 
3

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0234 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
 
Ms. Jennifer Brundage  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
Office of Water Standards and Health Protection Division (4305T)  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VIA EMAIL: www.regulations.gov 
 
 
Re: Calista Corporation Comments on Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Proposed Rule, “Water 
Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. 74361-74379 (Dec. 
5, 2022) 
 
Dear Ms. Brundage:  
 
On behalf of the Calista Corporation (“Calista”), an Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (“ANCSA”) Regional 
Corporation serving more than 36,000 Alaska Native shareholders with roots in the 56 tribal communities of the 
Yukon-Kuskokwim River Delta Region (“Y-K Region”), we thank the Environmental Protection Agency 
(“EPA”) for the opportunity to comment on the proposed rule, “Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions 
to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022). While we look forward to providing 
comments, Calista respectfully requests a 90-day extension for comment. 
 
It is critical that Alaska Native Corporations (“ANCs”) be provided the timely opportunity to meaningfully 
participate in the development and implementation of policies that could impact our ability to fulfill the purposes 
for which we were established under ANCSA. The EPA may not be aware of implications of the proposed rule 
to ANC lands, projects, and resources, and it is critical that potentially impacted ANCs, who own and manage the 
land, be invited to consult and be given the opportunity to clarify and weigh in on any unforeseen lands and 
natural resources impacts. 
 
Calista thanks the EPA for considering this request for a 90-day comment extension.  
 
 
Quyana, 
 
 
 
Tisha Kuhns 
CALISTA CORPORATION

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0264 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Page 1 of 32 
 
Submitted online at Federal eRulemaking Portal: https://www.regulations.gov/ 
 
March 6, 2023 
Michael Regan  
Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of the Administrator, Mail Code 1101A 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE:   
Comments on Environmental Protection Agency Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 -- 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (Proposed 
Rule) 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
These comments are submitted on behalf of the Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe, Port Gamble 
S’Klallam Tribe, and Suquamish Indian Tribe (collectively, “the Tribes”) in response to the 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) “Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights (Proposed Rule),” 87 Fed. Reg. 74,361 (Dec. 5, 2023). The Tribes sincerely 
appreciate EPA’s efforts to “provide a nationally applicable regulatory framework to ensure that [water 
quality standards (WQS)] protect applicable reserved rights.” Id. at 74,366. We agree with EPA that the 
proposed rule will provide “clarity, predictability, and transparency,” and that there is an urgent need for 
this. Id. EPA’s efforts to propose a “uniform approach for establishment of WQS where tribal reserved 
rights apply and [to] clearly [lay] out how EPA will review such WQS” is appreciated. Id. Not only will 
this ensure a consistent approach across regions, but it will also ensure more durable decisions that do not 
become easily subject to whims of changing administrations. While these comments suggest several 
improvements—some crucial—to the proposed rule (“Reserved Rights Rule” or “rule”), the Tribes 
generally support the rule and look forward to working with EPA and Washington to implement it.  
I.  
THE TRIBES AND THEIR CITIZENS DEPEND ON CLEAN WATER FOR THE FREE 
AND SAFE EXERCISE OF THE RESERVED RIGHTS AT THE HEART OF THEIR 
CULTURES, ECONOMIES, AND CEREMONIAL LIFE.  
 
The Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe, Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe, and Suquamish Indian Tribe are 
fishing tribes. Since time immemorial, fishing has been the foundation on which their cultures, 
economies, and ceremonial life were based. In 1855, when the Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe and Port 
Gamble S’Klallam Tribe entered the Treaty of Point No Point1 and the Suquamish Indian Tribe entered 
the Treaty of Point Elliott2 with the United States, sacred promises were made between sovereign nations. 
These three Tribes and others ceded hundreds of thousands of acres of their homelands, while reserving 
 
1 12 Stat. 933. 
2 12 Stat. 927. 

 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 32 
 
certain rights to themselves. Chief among the rights reserved—and persistently defended by the Tribes—
is the right to continue taking fish and shellfish as they always had throughout their usual and accustomed 
fishing grounds (U&A), as well as to hunt and gather across open and unclaimed lands in their ancestral 
territory. Article 4 of the 1855 Treaty of Point No Point and Article 5 of the 1855 Treaty of Point Elliott 
state: 
The right of taking fish at usual and accustomed grounds and stations is further secured to 
said Indians, in common with all citizens of the United States; and of erecting temporary 
houses for the purpose of curing; together with the privilege of hunting and gathering 
roots and berries on open and unclaimed lands. 
With this treaty language, these three Tribes, like other Treaty Tribes in Western Washington, reserved to 
themselves fundamental rights that they had exercised since time immemorial. The Treaties were intended 
to allow the Tribes and their citizens to continue their ways of life in the face of white settlement, both at 
that time and in perpetuity, in large part by continuing robust tribal harvest of fish in off-reservation 
marine waters and freshwater rivers and lakes, as well as hunting and gathering in open and unclaimed 
lands. And in addition to extinguishing tribal land claims to pave the way for orderly non-native 
settlement, the treaty-makers’ recognition of these reserved rights secured for the United States, as 
instructed by their superiors in Washington, D.C., the crucial practical benefit of not having to pay for the 
Indians’ perpetual subsistence.  
The United States, for its part, made promises in the Treaties that were designed to endure 
forever. By making these promises, the United States took on trust obligations to the Tribes. The United 
States Government, as Trustee for the Tribes, has a sacred responsibility to protect the Tribes’ access to 
clean water in order to ensure these sacred rights can be exercised fully forever. Fish are of central 
importance to the Tribes’ culture, economies, ceremonies and diets. The United States Supreme Court has 
recognized the central importance of fishing for tribes:  it is “not much less necessary to the existence of 
the Indians than the air they breathed.” United States v Winans, 198 U.S. 371, 381 (1905). Likewise, as 
discussed in greater detail in Section III.B. below, the Supreme Court has long held that when land has 
been reserved to a tribe, a reservation of water sufficient to meet the purposes of the reservation is 
implied. Winters v. United States, 207 U.S. 564, 576-77 (1908). A reserved right to take fish also 
impliedly reserves water necessary to fulfill that purpose, that is, water sufficient to keep streams suitable 
for fish reproduction and tribal harvest. E.g., United States v. Adair, 723 F.2d 1394, 1414-15 (9th Cir. 
1983) (tribe reserved the waters needed to “secure to the Tribe a continuation of its traditional . . . fishing 
lifestyle”); Kittitas Reclamation District v. Sunnyside Valley Irrigation District, 763 F.2d 1032, 1033-34 
(9th Cir. 1985) (water withdrawals that would destroy salmon eggs before they could hatch enjoined to 
protect treaty fishing right); Colville Confederated Tribes v. Walton, 647 F.2d 42, 47-48 (9th Cir. 1981) 
(implied reservation of water to preserve tribe’s replacement fishing grounds); Dep’t of Ecology v. 
Yakima Reservation Irrig. Dist. (Aquavella II), 121 Wash. 2d 257, 276-77 (Wash. 1993) (implied 
reservation of instream water to fulfill treaty right to take fish). 
 
Despite the promises made, the Tribes’ way of life is now severely threatened. Rivers, streams, 
bays, straits, lakes, and wetlands across the State of Washington—and throughout the Tribes’ off-
reservation usual and accustomed fishing grounds and open and unclaimed hunting and gathering lands—
are polluted and subject to fish advisories that warn people not to eat fish they catch lest they risk cancer 
and other diseases. Tribal members are left with the dilemma of whether to continue sustenance fishing 
and imperil their health, or to forgo sustenance fishing and imperil their culture. In waters in which Tribes 

 
 
 
 
Page 3 of 32 
 
reserved, through Treaties, their right to continue fishing as they had since time immemorial, tribal 
members should not be subjected to such a dilemma. Wildlife populations that the Tribes are dependent 
on are at risk from dehydration, illness, and death when drinking polluted waters. These waters and rights 
are entitled to protection under federal law, including under the Clean Water Act, which recognizes that 
tribal fishing, hunting, and gathering is the kind of use entitled to protection through appropriate water 
quality standards.  
 
Like other Treaty Tribes of Western Washington, the Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe, the Port 
Gamble S’Klallam Tribe, and the Suquamish Indian Tribe ceded most of their land but reserved their 
rights by treaty to fishing, hunting, and gathering. Today, over 150 years after signing the Treaty of Point 
No Point and the Treaty of Point Elliott, the Tribes retain deep cultural and economic ties to the 
surrounding waters and to their fisheries. The Lower Elwha Reservation and adjacent tribal trust lands 
comprise 1,017 acres with roughly 900 acres along the Elwha River, where it flows into the Strait of Juan 
de Fuca, and the Port Gamble Reservation comprises roughly 1,788 acres on Port Gamble Bay. The 
waters around these respective reservations constitute a core area for each Tribe, but both Tribes also 
depend heavily on harvest of fish, shellfish, and other aquatic resources throughout the larger, shared 
U&A. More than 150 Port Gamble tribal members and 100 Lower Elwha tribal members earn all or a 
portion of their livelihood working as commercial salmon and shellfish fishers. The Suquamish Indian 
Tribe is located on the Port Madison Indian Reservation along the shores of Puget Sound and is 
comprised of 7,657 acres. Because there are no large rivers in Suquamish’s territory, the Suquamish 
Indian Tribe is one of the few Western Washington Tribes who historically and currently travels to and 
covers a vast fishing area to harvest marine resources within its U&A. More than 140 Suquamish tribal 
members earn all or a portion of their livelihood working as commercial salmon and shellfish fishermen. 
Within their respective U&A, the Tribes that share the U&A are entitled to take half the harvestable fish 
and shellfish. In addition, each Tribe conducts fisheries throughout the shared U&A to obtain fish for 
ceremonial use (including funerals, weddings, and honoring and gifting observances, as well as other 
ceremonies and practices), and subsistence harvests from the Tribes’ U&A are a key element of the diet 
of many tribal members. These treaty rights continue to be of central spiritual, cultural, subsistence and 
economic importance to the Tribes. Indeed, they are central to the Tribes’ identity, and in reserving these 
rights, the Tribes reserved their lifeways.  
II. 
EPA’S PROPOSAL TO PROTECT TRIBAL RESERVED RIGHTS THROUGH WATER 
QUALITY STANDARDS IS CONSISTENT WITH—AND DEMANDED BY—BOTH 
FEDERAL INDIAN LAW AND THE CLEAN WATER ACT. 
Clean water is necessary to support tribal lifeways. It is a matter of vital importance to all people 
of the State of Washington, and of particularly vital importance to the Tribes, whose cultural, spiritual and 
subsistence practices require consuming much higher levels of aquatic species—including fish, wildlife, 
and plants that are vulnerable to toxic chemicals—than the general population. In order to safely eat fish 
and to ensure fish populations are of harvestable size, the habitat upon which they depend must be clean 
and protected. Ancient tribal customs and traditions reflect this reality by proscribing waste, regulating 
distribution of the catch to ensure appropriate upstream sharing and perpetuation of the fish runs, and 
discouraging water pollution. Modern tribal fisheries management, under which the Tribes are recognized 
co-managers with the State of Washington, builds on these traditions. Tribes are at the forefront of sound 
hatchery practices, habitat restoration, and cleanup of toxic contamination of fresh and marine waters. 
Although highly dependent on clean water, until very recently, EPA and the State of Washington 

 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 32 
 
had not considered the Tribes’ reserved rights when developing water quality standards, and therefore, the 
Tribes historically have not been afforded the full protection of the Clean Water Act. In turn, this has 
placed the burden of western development and industry on the Tribes, forcing them to choose between 
engaging in cultural and subsistence practices or sacrificing the health and welfare of tribal elders, tribal 
children, and other tribal members. As our Trustee, the U.S. Government must meet its trust obligation to 
the Tribes and ensure that stringent water quality standards are promulgated to ensure the protection of 
our reserved rights across our usual and accustomed areas and open and unclaimed lands.  
A.  
EPA’s Description of Tribal Reserved Rights and the Federal Indian Law That 
Requires Their Protection Is Accurate. 
The Tribes appreciate EPA’s commitment to doing that through promulgation of the Reserved 
Rights Rule. EPA is correct that “tribal reserved rights to resources are an intrinsic part of tribal life and 
are of deep cultural, economic, and subsistence importance to tribes.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,363. In the 
preamble to the proposed rule, the agency describes well the origin and sources of reserved rights, such as 
the right to take fish off-reservation that was reserved by many tribes in the Pacific Northwest. Id. at 
74,363-64. The agency also correctly acknowledges that “tribal reserved rights encompass subsidiary 
rights that are not explicitly addressed in treaty or statutory language but are necessary to render those 
rights meaningful.”3 Id. at 74,364 (citing United States v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371, 381 (1905); United 
States v. Washington, 853 F.3d 946, 966 (9th Cir. 2017), aff’d, 138 S.Ct. 1832 (per curiam)).  
Chief among these implied, subsidiary rights—for EPA’s purposes—is the reality that the 
environment must be of sufficient quality to ensure the subject of the right—whether it be fish, shellfish, 
beaver, muskrat, seaweed, wild rice, fiddlehead ferns, and many other aquatic or aquatic-dependent 
species—can thrive and remain available for tribal members to use, and to do so safely. Without the clean 
water that allows this, many usufructuary rights reserved by tribes would be rendered worthless. E.g., 
Winans, 198 U.S. at 381 (the right of taking fish at usual and accustomed areas necessarily included the 
right of access to those areas as “[n]o other conclusion would give effect to the treaty”); United States v. 
Washington, 853 F.3d at 965 (“The Indians reasonably understood Governor Stevens to promise not only 
that they would have access to their usual and accustomed fishing places, but also that there would be fish 
sufficient to sustain them.”); see also Letter from Hilary C. Tompkins, Solicitor, Dep’t of Interior, to Avi 
Garbow, General Counsel, EPA, regarding Maine’s WQS and Tribal Fishing Rights of Maine Tribes (Jan. 
30, 2015) (Attachment 1) (“Tribal fishing rights encompass subsidiary rights that are not explicitly 
included in treaty or statutory language but are nonetheless necessary to render them meaningful.”).  
EPA’s role as trustee, moreover, carries with it the duty and power to protect tribal reserved 
rights. United States v. Kagama, 118 U.S. 375, 383-84 (1886). The trust responsibility imposes upon the 
 
3 Related to this, the Tribes note a slight overstatement in EPA’s explanation of how this rule may prove to benefit 
tribes without federally reserved rights or resources in locations to which those rights do not extend. At page 74,378 
of the preamble, EPA writes, “It is EPA’s expectation that many of the coordination and collaboration processes that 
will be developed to implement this rule will also lead to better protection of aquatic and aquatic-dependent 
resources not referenced in treaties and similar instruments.” While the Tribes appreciate the sentiment and this 
likely benefit of the rule, the language is overinclusive. Reserved rights do not necessarily need to be “referenced in 
treaties and similar instruments” since they can arise by implication. Such rights must necessarily be included within 
the scope of the Reserved Rights Rule. 

 
 
 
 
Page 5 of 32 
 
United States and all its agencies the obligation to follow “the most exacting fiduciary standards” in 
dealing with the tribes, including in the protection of tribal rights and property. Seminole Nation v. United 
States, 316 U.S. 286, 296-97 (1942); Parravano v. Babbitt, 70 F.3d 539, 546-47 (9th Cir. 1995) 
(recognizing the United States’ trust obligation to protect impliedly reserved fishing rights). Consistent 
with this relationship of trust, federal courts require that ambiguities in federal laws regarding tribes must 
be construed in the tribes’ favor. E.g., Minnesota v. Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians, 526 U.S. 172, 
200 (1999).  
EPA has long recognized these duties. See, e.g., EPA, Policy for the Administration of 
Environmental Programs on Indian Reservations (Nov. 8, 1984), available at 
http://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-04/documents/indian-policy-84.pdf; EPA Policy on 
Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribes at 3 (May 4, 2011), available at 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2013-08/documents/cons-and-coord-with-indian-tribes-policy.pdf 
[hereinafter EPA Consultation Policy] (“EPA recognizes the federal government’s trust responsibility, 
which derives from the historical relationship between the federal government and Indian tribes as 
expressed in certain treaties and federal Indian law.”). In fact, the agency commemorated the 30th 
anniversary of, and reaffirmed, its 1984 Indian Policy, indicating that EPA should use its authority to 
protect tribal rights and resources when it is within its discretion to do so. See EPA Administrator 
McCarthy, Memorandum Commemorating the 30th Anniversary of EPA’s Indian Policy at 1 (Dec. 1, 
2014), available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-
05/documents/indianpolicytreatyrightsmemo2014.pdf. And just last year, EPA again formally reaffirmed 
the EPA Policy for the Administration of Environmental Programs on Indian Reservations, stating “the 
EPA reiterates its recognition that the United States has a unique legal relationship with tribal 
governments based on the Constitution, treaties, statutes, executive orders and court decisions. . . . The 
reaffirmation of the 1984 Indian Policy articulates the importance of the EPA’s tribal programs and our 
relationship with tribal governments. . . . It is an important time in our partnership with tribes as the EPA 
builds on past successes and strives to meet current and future environmental challenges with tribes.” 
Michael S. Regan, Reaffirmation of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s Indian Policy (Sept. 30, 
2021), https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-09/oita-21-000-6427.pdf. EPA itself has 
described its “fundamental objective in carrying out its responsibilities in Indian country” as “to protect 
human health and the environment.” EPA Consultation Policy at 3; EPA, EPA Policy on Consultation 
and Coordination with Indian Tribes: Guidance for Discussing Tribal Treaty Rights at 2, available at 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-
02/documents/tribal_treaty_rights_guidance_for_discussing_tribal_treaty_rights.pdf (acknowledging 
“implied right to sufficient water quantity or water quality to ensure that fishing is possible” attendant to 
reserved rights).  
For many years and on many occasions, EPA has recognized these fundamental obligations to 
tribes in its decision making and defense of its decisions regarding water quality. E.g., EPA, Mem. in 
Supp. of Mot. for Summ. J. at 16, Montana v. U.S. Env’t Prot. Agency, 941 F. Supp. 945 (D. Mont. 1996) 
(“Tribes require clean water for a domestic water supply and to maintain fish, aquatic life and other 
wildlife for both subsistence and cultural reasons . . . In short, clean water is a crucial resource that plays a 
central role in Tribal culture. Because clean water has a direct effect on the . . . health and welfare of . . . 
Tribes that is serious and substantial, . . . Tribes have a strong interest in regulating on-reservation water 
quality.”); Revision of Certain Federal Water Quality Criteria Applicable to Washington, 80 Fed. Reg. 
55,063, 55,066 (Sept. 14, 2015) (“[M]any tribes hold reserved rights to take fish for subsistence, 
ceremonial, religious, and commercial purposes, including treaty-reserved rights to fish at all usual and 

 
 
 
 
Page 6 of 32 
 
accustomed fishing grounds and stations . . . . Such rights include not only a right to take those fish, but 
necessarily include an attendant right to not be exposed to unacceptable health risks by consuming those 
fish.”); State Program Requirements: Approval of Application by Maine to Administer the National 
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Program, 68 Fed. Reg. 65,052, 65,056 (Nov. 18, 2003) 
(“Clearly, the physical setting of the southern tribes in such close proximity to important rivers makes 
surface water quality important to them and their riverine culture.”); Promulgation of Certain Federal 
Water Quality Standards Applicable to Maine, 81 Fed. Reg. 92,466, 92,479 (Dec. 19, 2016) (“[T]he 
Tribes’ ability to take fish for their sustenance . . . would be rendered meaningless if it were not supported 
under the CWA by water quality sufficient to ensure that tribal members can safely eat the fish for their 
own sustenance.”). But until now, EPA’s commitment to these obligations has varied across EPA regions 
and across different administrations. See, e.g., 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,364-65, 74,370 (describing human 
health criteria decisions in Washington and Maine). 
The Tribes are pleased to support EPA in its decision to bring greater clarity and transparency to 
its Clean Water Act oversight obligations and agency decision making by codifying the simple yet 
fundamental rights and obligations described both here and in the preamble to the Reserved Rights Rule 
(87 Fed. Reg. at 74,363-66). This will bring consistency in CWA Section 303(c) oversight and decision 
making that implicates treaties and other sources of federal law reflecting reserved rights. EPA correctly 
states: “Tribal reserved rights to aquatic resources could be impaired by water quality levels that limit 
right holders’ ability to utilize their rights . . . . In exercising its CWA section 303(c) authority, EPA has 
an obligation to ensure that its actions are consistent with treaties, statutes, executive orders, and other 
sources of Federal law reflecting tribal reserved rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,364. By promulgating the 
Reserved Rights Rule, EPA will finally codify what it has long acknowledged: that tribes require clean 
water sufficient to support the tribal resources and uses that are the subject of their reserved rights, and 
that the Clean Water Act must be applied to ensure that protection.  
B.  
The Clean Water Act Has Not Adequately Protected Tribal Reserved Rights to Date 
But Can and Must Do So Now. 
The proposed Reserved Rights Rule does not come a moment too soon. Although the Clean 
Water Act recently celebrated its 50th anniversary, it has failed to meet its objectives in many waters in 
which tribes hold reserved rights that depend on clean water. A recent ProPublica article made waves in 
the Pacific Northwest and highlights the problem. See Tony Schick and Maya Miller, The U.S. Promised 
Tribes They Would Always Have Fish, but the Fish They Have Pose Toxic Risks, PROPUBLICA (Nov. 22, 
2022), available at https://www.propublica.org/article/how-the-us-broke-promise-to-protect-fish-for-
tribes (Attachment 2). The article describes toxics testing of fifty salmon purchased from Native 
fishermen for thirteen metals and two classes of chemicals, which was commissioned by Oregon Public 
Broadcasting and ProPublica. The testing revealed “concentrations of [mercury and polychlorinated 
biphenyls (PCBs)] in the salmon that the EPA and both Oregon and Washington’s health agencies deem 
unsafe at the levels consumed by many of the 68,000-plus Native people who are members of tribes living 
in the Columbia River Basin today.” Id. In the wake of the article, lawmakers have called for policy 
changes and additional funding. Maya Miller and Tony Schick, Toxic Salmon Reporting ‘Deeply 
Troubling,’ Lawmaker Says, Demanding Changes to Protect Pacific Northwest Tribal Health, 
PROPUBLICA (Dec. 14, 2022), available at https://www.propublica.org/article/toxic-salmon-columbia-
river-basin-lawmaker-response (Attachment 3). But notwithstanding lawmakers’ seeming surprise, the 
problems in the Columbia River have been known for a long time and are well-documented. E.g., EPA, 
Columbia River Basin: State of the River Report for Toxics (Jan. 2009), available at 

 
 
 
 
Page 7 of 32 
 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/documents/columbia_state_of_the_river_report_jan2009.pdf 
(Attachment 4) (Section 5.0: Status and Trends for Mercury, DDT, PCBs, and PBDEs). Yet, the effects of 
this pollution on Columbia Basin tribes and tribal health have been allowed to continue.  
This is commonplace. Across the region, tribes suffer from these same types of gaps in Clean 
Water Act protection and enforcement. For instance, we have known for many years that stormwater 
pollution has had lethal effects on coho salmon to which tribes have treaty-reserved rights throughout the 
Pacific Northwest. Instead of immediately requiring more effective stormwater infrastructure and best 
management practices to address the issue, much time was spent on identifying the specific culprit. Sarah 
McQuate, Tire-Related Chemical is Largely Responsible for Adult Coho Salmon Deaths in Urban 
Streams, UW News (Dec. 3, 2020), available at https://www.washington.edu/news/2020/12/03/tire-
related-chemical-largely-responsible-for-adult-coho-salmon-deaths-in-urban-streams/ (Attachment 5). It 
is good that we now know 6PPD-quinone’s identity and its toxicity, so that tire manufacturers can be 
pressed to replace that additive with a non-toxic substitute. See, e.g., Zhenyu Tian et al., 6PPD-Quinone: 
Revised Toxicity Assessment and Quantification with a Commercial Standard, 9 ENVIRONMENTAL 
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY LETTERS 140 (2022) (Attachment 6). However, if the Clean Water Act were 
geared more toward protecting tribal resources, it may have forced more rapid stormwater improvements 
even in the face of some uncertainty about the specific chemical’s identity.4 And now that we do know 
the lethal effects of this chemical on coho—and tribal reserved rights that depend on coho—the Clean 
Water Act requires immediate action. The same is true of other known pollutants that impede tribal 
reserved rights, such as PFAS, Environmental Working Group, Eating One Freshwater Fish Equals A 
Month Of Drinking ‘Forever Chemicals’ Water, ScienceBlog (Jan. 17, 2023), 
https://scienceblog.com/536016/eating-one-freshwater-fish-equals-a-month-of-drinking-forever-
chemicals-water/ (Attachment 7); Nicole Ogrysko, New Research Shows Dangers of Consuming 
Freshwater Fish Laced with PFAS, Maine Public (Jan. 24, 2023), 
https://www.mainepublic.org/environment-and-outdoors/2023-01-24/new-research-shows-dangers-of-
consuming-freshwater-fish-laced-with-pfas (Attachment 8), drug residues from wastewater treatment 
plants, Lynda V. Mapes, Drugs Found in Puget Sound Salmon From Tainted Wastewater, SEATTLE 
TIMES (Feb. 25, 2016), https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-news/environment/drugs-flooding-into-
puget-sound-and-its-salmon/ (Attachment 9), nutrients, Allegra Abramo, Outdated Sewage Treatment Is 
Suffocating Fish In Puget Sound, InvestigateWest (Dec. 7, 2020), 
https://www.invw.org/2020/12/07/outdated-sewage-treatment-is-suffocating-fish-in-puget-sound/ 
(Attachment 10), temperature, Eric Barker, EPA Report: Dams Play Large Role in Raising Water 
Temperatures, LEWISTON TRIBUNE (May 25, 2020), 
https://www.spokesman.com/stories/2020/may/25/epa-report-dams-play-large-role-in-raising-water-t/ 
(Attachment 11), and any other pollutants that depress the population of aquatic and aquatic-dependent 
resources for which tribes reserved rights. Despite five decades of Clean Water Act implementation, 
tribes and their members are still burdened by legacy and ongoing pollution that impedes full exercise of 
their rights and diminishes their health. The proposed rule can force swifter and more protective action 
than we’ve seen in the past. And it must. 
As EPA has long acknowledged, “‘[a]ny specific treaty requirements have the force of law,’ and 
 
4 The problem with stormwater is not limited to 6PPD-quinone. For example, the map described here shows multiple 
pollutants discharged through stormwater in the Tribes’ U&A: https://www.geekwire.com/2022/first-of-its-kind-
stormwater-heat-map-lights-up-pollutants-fouling-waters-in-washington-state/.   

 
 
 
 
Page 8 of 32 
 
therefore, ‘State water quality standards will have to meet any treaty requirements.’” 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74,366 (citing 48 Fed. Reg. 51,400, 51,412 (Nov. 8, 1983)). However, whereas EPA previously declined 
to explicitly require States to adopt standards that meet treaty requirements” in its 1983 WQS regulations 
because such issues had been “adequately resolved . . . without the need for regulatory language,” 
experience since that time makes clear that regulatory language is urgently needed for states to understand 
their obligations with respect to the intersection of U.S.-Indian treaties and water quality standards in 
order to protect tribal reserved rights from the persistent and detrimental effects of water pollution. We 
believe that the Reserved Rights Rule has the potential, after accounting for the other comments made 
herein, to bring transparency and clarity to these issues in the revision and approval processes for state 
water quality standards. Beyond the ineffective implementation of the Clean Water Act described above, 
the Tribes have suffered the whiplash of inconsistent federal positions on tribal reserved rights and have 
been forced to devote considerable resources to ensuring their rights are protected. A recent example is 
the decades-long fight regarding the human health criteria (HHC) in Washington, including the rollbacks 
of the last administration. Our Tribes were dismayed by how long it took to get more protective HHC in 
place, as well as EPA’s abandonment of its trust obligations and adherence to the law in the last 
administration. We appreciate EPA’s recent restoration of the more protective HHC in Washington and 
support EPA’s efforts to develop a more durable and consistent federal policy for the future.  
In particular, we support the proposed rule’s commitment to the establishment of WQS that 
protect “[t]he exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the 
aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource” and “the health” of tribal members exercising reserved rights. 87 
Fed. Reg. at 74,378 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(1)-(2)) (emphasis added). While at times the 
preamble seems somewhat narrowly focused on toxics (e.g., human health criteria), we appreciate that the 
language of the rule itself is sufficient to encompass what should be two main drivers of the WQS: human 
health and habitat health that allows for healthy and abundant populations of species that are the subject 
to tribal reserved rights. This is crucial to ensuring an effective rule that does not only reach toxic 
pollution (such as in the Washington Department of Ecology’s upcoming revision of its aquatic life toxics 
criteria), but also reaches pernicious water quality problems like nutrient and temperature pollution that 
depress aquatic-dependent populations of species important to the exercise of tribal reserved rights, 
particularly in the era of climate change. In short, the Tribes believe wholeheartedly that 40 C.F.R. § 
131.9 should be amended to ensure that WQS “must protect tribal reserved rights applicable to waters 
subject to such standards,” and believe the Reserved Rights Rule should be finalized as quickly as 
possible and no later than the end of this year. 
The proposed Reserved Rights Rule is entirely consistent with—and even demanded by—the 
Clean Water Act, and it is well within the broad scope of EPA’s statutory authority under the Act. The 
overarching commitment of the Clean Water Act is to “restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and 
biological integrity of the Nation’s waters.” 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a). To that end, Congress established a 
national policy that “the discharge of toxic pollutants in toxic amounts be prohibited” and directed that 
water quality be sufficient to protect and allow the propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife safe for 
human consumption by July 1, 1983. See id. § 1251(a)(2), (3). The Act is designed to ratchet down the 
level of pollution over time to allow for ever safer use of the water until all uses are protected and remain 
protected. While the date for accomplishing these goals has long since passed, EPA’s efforts through this 
proposed rule help to ensure the Act’s polices are finally fulfilled as it relates to protecting tribal reserved 
rights wherever they exist in the waters and wetlands of Washington State. 
 
Water quality standards are the foundation of the Clean Water Act’s water quality-based control 

 
 
 
 
Page 9 of 32 
 
program. They define goals for a water body by designating the uses that water body supports or should 
support (“designated uses”); set water quality criteria designed to protect those uses and measure progress 
made (“criteria”); and establish anti-degradation policies, so that existing uses and water quality necessary 
to support those uses are protected and so that bodies with very high quality water do not become 
impaired. In order to attain the Act’s goals and to protect the uses of water, the Act imposes an obligation 
on states, with EPA acting in an oversight role, to develop water quality standards comprised of 
designated uses and narrative or numeric water quality criteria sufficient to protect uses such as fishing. 
Id. § 1313(a)-(b). Specifically, Clean Water Act section 303 directs states with delegated authority to do 
the following when they adopt or revise water quality standards for waters of the United States. 33 U.S.C. 
§ 1313.  
Whenever the State revises or adopts a new standard, such revised or new standard shall 
be submitted to the Administrator. Such revised or new water quality standard shall 
consist of the designated uses of the navigable waters involved and the water quality 
criteria for such waters based upon such uses. Such standards shall be such as to protect 
the public health or welfare, enhance the quality of water and serve the purposes of this 
chapter. Such standards shall be established taking into consideration their use and value 
for public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, and 
agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and also taking into consideration their use 
and value for navigation. 
Id. § 1313(c)(2)(A) (emphasis added). As EPA notes in the preamble, whatever WQS a state might adopt 
must not affect or impair the provisions of any treaty of the United States under section 511 of the Act. 87 
Fed. Reg. at 74,364-65; see also 33 U.S.C. § 1371 (“[The Act] shall not be construed as . . . affecting or 
impairing the provisions of any treaty of the United States.”). 
 
While states have the first shot at promulgating protective, science-based water quality standards, 
EPA is obligated under the Act to review and to disapprove a state’s efforts if they fall short of meeting 
the requirements of the Act. Id. § 1313(a)-(c). Furthermore, EPA has independent authority to ensure that 
a state’s standards are up to date and adequate to meet the Act’s requirements. Id. § 1313(c). Thus, where 
a state fails to act in accordance with the statute, EPA is obligated to fulfill the state’s traditional role of 
issuing standards that comply with the Act. In other words, EPA is correct that “the statute’s structure and 
objectives for the establishment and oversight of WQS, including the discretion afforded to EPA, provide 
ample room for the agency to consider and give effect to all applicable reserved rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74,365. As EPA notes, it has exercised this authority with regard to the human health criteria in 
Washington and Maine before, and as noted in the previous section, those actions and this are consistent 
with long-standing EPA policy regarding tribal rights and resources. 
III. 
COMMENTS ON SPECIFIC SECTIONS OF THE PROPOSED RESESERVED RIGHTS 
RULE AND ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS POSED BY EPA IN THE PREAMBLE  
 
In this section, the Tribes provide comments on specific statements in the Federal Register notice 
and proposed rule language, as well as respond to questions specifically raised by EPA regarding the 
proposed rule. 
A. 
EPA Must Require States To Protect Tribal Reserved Rights By Employing All 
Three Components of Water Quality Standards. 

 
 
 
 
Page 10 of 32 
 
 
The Federal Register notice indicates that after a state has determined that tribal reserved rights 
exist in the waters over which it has Clean Water Act jurisdiction and the level of water quality necessary 
to protect those rights, “states would be required to revise their WQS if needed to ensure protection of 
those rights using designated uses, criteria and/or antidegradation as described at proposed 40 CFR 
131.9(c).” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371. The proposed regulatory language is: 
(c) In order to meet the requirements in paragraph (a) of this section, States must: (1) 
Designate uses consistent with § 131.10 that either expressly incorporate protection of the 
tribal reserved rights or encompass such rights; and (2) Establish water quality criteria 
consistent with § 131.11 to protect tribal reserved rights; and/or (3) Use applicable 
antidegradation requirements consistent with § 131.12 to maintain and protect water 
quality that protects tribal reserved rights. 
The Tribes support specific regulatory language directing states to promulgate each component of water 
quality standards in order to meet the requirements in paragraph (a) of proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9 
(“Water quality standards must protect tribal reserved rights applicable to waters subject to such 
standards.”). However, as described below, the Tribes believe that the regulatory language should be 
stated only in the conjunctive (“and”)—without use of the phrase “and/or” between subsections (2) and 
(3)—in order to comport with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and its existing implementing 
regulations, as well as to best meet the goals of the Reserved Rights Rule. Consequently, in response to 
EPA’s query “whether the following two options related to Tier 2 and Tier 3 could be used to protect 
tribal reserved rights in lieu of the options identified in proposed 40 CFR 131.9(c)(1) and (2) and 
explained earlier in this section,” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371 (emphasis added), the answer is “no.” However, 
by adding some more specifics about how a state might use or modify its antidegradation policy to protect 
tribal reserved rights in already high quality waters (Tier 3 and potentially Tier 2), we believe that 
antidegradation policies are a legitimate and helpful way for states to protect tribal reserved rights in high 
quality waters in addition to establishing designated uses and water quality criteria for them.  
1. 
Water Quality Standards Include Three Components, and EPA Cannot Rely 
Solely on States’ Antidegradation Policies to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights. 
 
The proposed rule suggests one option to protect tribal reserved rights, either alone or in 
combination with others, is for states to revise their antidegradation policies. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371; id. at 
74,378 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(c)(2)) (“and/or”). Reliance solely on antidegradation policies, while 
not utilizing the other options EPA proposes, does not meet the plain language of the Clean Water Act 
and will not adequately protect tribal reserved rights. EPA should only be considering the use of 
antidegradation policies in addition to protective designated uses and water quality criteria. 
 
The proposed rule’s preamble explains that the core components of water quality standards are 
designated uses, water quality criteria, and antidegradation requirements. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,362 (citing 
33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(3)). As explained above, EPA is required to protect reserved rights; forgoing the use 
of two of the three water quality standards core components does not make sense and would not comply 
with EPA’s obligation to protect reserved rights. Importantly, it also would not meet the plain language of 
the Act, which requires that states’ “revised or new water quality standard shall consist of the designated 
uses of the navigable waters involved and the water quality criteria for such waters based upon such 
uses.” 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(2)(A) (emphasis added). The use of “and/or” (both the conjunctive and 
disjunctive) at proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(c) suggests that states could meet the requirements of the 

 
 
 
 
Page 11 of 32 
 
Clean Water Act either by completing all three components (designated uses and criteria and 
antidegradation) or by using only its antidegradation policy to meet the requirements of the Act.5 A 
disjunctive regulatory list (“or”) would seemingly allow a state to avoid submitting designated uses and 
criteria in its new or revised WQS and is therefore inconsistent with the plain statutory language.6   
 
Beyond the statutory imperatives, the current implementing regulations also would not permit 
sole reliance on antidegradation policies to protect tribal reserved rights in many cases. “Where existing 
water quality standards specify designated uses less than those which are presently being attained, the 
State shall revise its standards to reflect the uses actually being attained.”7 40 C.F.R. § 131.10(i) 
(emphasis added); see also Idaho Mining Ass’n v. Browner, 90 F. Supp. 2d 1078, 1081 (D. Idaho 2000). 
There is no dispute that tribal exercise of reserved rights is and has been occurring at waters under state 
jurisdiction throughout the country. Consequently, where a state has not yet designated tribal reserved 
right uses for water bodies in which tribes are currently exercising tribal reserved rights (at whatever level 
 
5 We do not interpret the proposed rule language as allowing either 1) designated uses and antidegradation policy, 
but no criteria; or 2) criteria and antidegradation policy, but no designated uses. If EPA intended either such option 
to be available to states, it is not clear from the regulatory language’s use of the conjunctive between (1) and (2) and 
the conjunctive/disjunctive between (2) and (3). We have not suggested alternative language due to our belief that 
only the conjunctive “and” should follow each subpart. 
6 EPA notes in the preamble that the “proposed rulemaking would complement the existing regulatory requirements 
set forth in EPA’s WQS regulation. In certain circumstances, these existing requirements may already be operating 
to ensure water quality levels are protective of particular tribal reserved rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371. In theory, 
this is true, and in many cases, EPA is correct that already promulgated designated uses (such as “fishing” or 
“wildlife”) may encompass tribal reserved rights and that criteria may exist that are intended to protect those 
designated uses. However, as suggested by the articles discussed in section II.B. above, the agency and states cannot 
assume that their existing WQS are getting the job done even where tribal reserved rights might conceptually fall 
within those WQS. In the preamble, 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371, EPA states: “EPA’s identification of two categories of 
circumstances where compliance with the proposed rulemaking is most likely to necessitate new or revised WQS is 
consistent with input from tribes during pre-proposal consultation, which focused primarily on protection of fish 
consumers and protection of wild rice. EPA requests comment on whether there are other instances where WQS 
may need to be adjusted to protect tribal reserved rights consistent with this proposed rulemaking. This request for 
comment includes, but is not limited to, whether there are tribal reserved rights to aquatic or aquatic-dependent 
resources that may require more stringent criteria than otherwise required to protect applicable designated uses in 
order to comply with this proposed rulemaking and whether there are differential health risks for right holders 
associated with activities other than fish consumption such that new or revised criteria may be necessary to comply 
with this proposed rulemaking.” Based on our experience, we have to disagree that the scope of likely revisions is so 
narrow. States, in consultation with tribes, will need to take a hard and fresh look at their WQS, including each of 
the specific things listed in EPA’s query, to see whether they are actually protecting tribal reserved rights (including 
harvestable populations of aquatic and aquatic-dependent species), even if their WQS theoretically should have been 
doing so all along. 
7 “Designated uses” are defined as “those uses specified in water quality standards for each water body or segment 
whether or not they are being attained.” 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(f). “Existing uses” are defined as “those uses actually 
attained in the water body on or after November 28, 1975, whether or not they are included in the water quality 
standards.” Id. § 131.3(e) (emphasis added).   

 
 
 
 
Page 12 of 32 
 
of use),8 it must do so, and the final Reserved Rights Rule should not introduce confusion about that.9 In 
addition, “States may adopt sub-categories of a use and set the appropriate criteria to reflect varying needs 
of such sub-categories of uses, for instance, to differentiate between cold water and warm water 
fisheries.” 40 C.F.R. § 131.10(c). So, for example, if a water body has been used for both sport and tribal 
reserved rights fishing, a designated use of “fishing” may incorporate both existing uses, but the criteria 
must be set at protective enough levels to protect the tribal reserved fishing right. 40 C.F.R. § 
131.11(a)(1) (“States must adopt those water quality criteria that protect the designated use. Such criteria 
must be based on sound scientific rationale and must contain sufficient parameters or constituents to 
protect the designated use. For waters with multiple use designations, the criteria shall support the most 
sensitive use.”). If the Reserved Rights Rule allows a state an “option” to use designated uses/criteria or 
its antidegradation policy, EPA risks causing confusion as to the state’s obligations under these regulatory 
provisions, which the agency does not propose to amend. States therefore should revise their designated 
uses (and accompanying criteria) to reflect the exercise of reserved rights use, in addition to protections 
afforded by antidegradation policies. The Reserved Rights Rule should be clear on this in the preamble, 
response to comments, and regulatory text. Specifically, “and/or” should be changed to “and” in the final 
40 C.F.R. § 131.9. 
2. 
State Antidegradation Policies Are Insufficient to Protect Tribal Reserved 
 
Rights On Their Own. 
 
Antidegradation policies can provide protections for high water quality that has not been 
degraded or has already been achieved, 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,363, but they offer no mandatory protections 
for enhancing degraded water quality to levels that can support the unsuppressed exercise of reserved 
rights. Consequently, the use of the antidegradation policy—even a strong policy—could only help 
protect tribal reserved rights in a very limited subset of waters of any given state. Where there are high 
quality waters, they should be protected under Tier 3 already, but certainly they should be afforded that 
 
8 As suggested in the preamble, this is underinclusive of the water bodies in which tribal reserved rights may apply 
and require WQS adjustments since water pollution and depressed populations of tribal resources may have 
prevented tribal use of a water body in which a tribe continues to have rights. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,370 (“EPA 
anticipates that the circumstances where WQS may need to be adjusted to protect tribal reserved rights would fall 
primarily into two categories: . . . 2. Where a reserved rights is not already accounted for as a designated or presently 
attained use for a waterbody, but that waterbody could be reasonably be expected to support that right in the future 
(e.g., if restoration efforts are underway).”). However, in cases where tribal reserved rights have been exercised 
(even if not to their full extent), these provisions of the implementing regulations are another action-forcing element 
to ensure they are included in designated uses and protected by appropriate water quality criteria. 
9 To be clear, discussion of “existing uses” in this paragraph is in regard to the action-forcing obligation under 
EPA’s regulations with respect to designated uses, which is separate and apart from the Tier 1 antidegradation 
protections for “existing uses.” The Tier 1 antidegradation policy requires all “[e]xisting instream water uses and the 
level of water quality necessary to protect the existing uses shall be maintained and protected.” 40 C.F.R. § 
131.12(a)(1); EPA Water Quality Standard Handbook § 4.2 (“Section 131.12(a)(l), or ‘Tier 1,’ protecting ‘existing 
uses,’ provides the absolute floor of water quality in all waters of the United States. This paragraph applies a 
minimum level of protection to all waters.”); EPA Water Quality Standard Handbook § 4.4.2 (“No activity is 
allowable under the antidegradation policy which would partially or completely eliminate any existing use whether 
or not that use is designated in a State’s water quality standards.”). As discussed below, the “absolute floor of water 
quality” is not sufficient to protect tribal reserved rights. 

 
 
 
 
Page 13 of 32 
 
protection wherever tribal reserved rights apply. We therefore strongly support the sentiments and goals 
driving EPA’s statement in the preamble that: “in situations where a waterbody’s existing water quality 
exceeds the levels that protect tribal reserved rights, these options would provide a mechanism to 
maintain high water quality and provide a margin of safety that would afford the water body increased 
resilience to potential future stressors, including climate change. Protecting such high-quality waters 
would potentially be more cost-effective and resource-efficient than investing in long-term restoration or 
remedial actions in the future.” 87 Fed. Reg. 74,371. Our Tribes and others in western Washington have 
been adamant and vocal that it is imperative that water quality in our usual and accustomed areas be 
protected where the water is of high quality or restored where the water has been degraded. EPA’s 
statement is consistent with the Tribes’ former objective. Our concern, however, is that the 
antidegradation policy should not be available to states as a sole option for protecting tribal reserved 
rights in their water quality standards.  
 
For various reasons, the Clean Water Act’s antidegradation requirements have not been used 
successfully to implement the Act’s purpose to “restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and 
biological integrity of the Nation’s waters.” 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a). In 2013, EPA stated:  
EPA indicated in its 1998 ANPRM that “on a national scale, antidegradation is not being 
used as effectively as it could be,” a concern that continues today and is echoed by 
stakeholders who have identified antidegradation as an underused component of water 
quality protection. . . . [T]he EPA received substantial feedback from stakeholders that 
existing CWA antidegradation regulatory provisions and related guidance have not been 
fully successful in ensuring consistent and effective implementation of Tier 2 high quality 
water protections.  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Clarifications, 78 Fed. Reg. 54,518, 54,526 (proposed Sept. 4, 2013) 
(to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 131). Similarly, in 1998, EPA explained: 
In sum, EPA’s current thinking is that the antidegradation policy is significantly 
underused as a tool to attain and maintain water quality and plan for and channel 
important economic and social development that can impact water quality. EPA believes 
this is especially true for nonpoint source run-off. 
Water Quality Standards Regulation, 63 Fed. Reg. 36,742, 36,780 (proposed July 7, 1998). Numerous 
commentators have recognized these issues as well, including problems stemming from overly broad 
federal requirements for states and lack of EPA authority to review designations beyond broad language; 
ineffective or even no classification designations; minimal use of Outstanding National Resource Water 
designations; lack of nonpoint source pollution regulation and thus no nonpoint triggering of 
antidegradation reviews; and elevation of or deference to economic considerations. See, e.g., Katherine A. 
Zogas, The Clean Water Act’s Antidegradation Policy: Has It Been “Dumped”?, 42 J. MARSHALL L. 
REV. 209, 227-28 (2008) (Attachment 12); John A. Chilson, Keeping Clean Waters Clean: Making the 
Clean Water Act’s Antidegradation Policy Work, 32 U. MICH. J.L. REFORM 545, 548, 553-64 (1999) 
(Attachment 13); Kent Modesitt, Antidegradation: A Lost Cause or the Next Cause, 2 U. DENV. WATER 
L. REV. 189, 220-22 (Spring 1999) (Attachment 14); see also The Antidegradation Policy, 2 PUB. NAT. 
RESOURCES L. § 19:13 (2nd ed.) (“Indeed, the entire antidegradation policy of some states is so vague as 
to be virtually meaningless.”) (Attachment 15). 

 
 
 
 
Page 14 of 32 
 
The proposed rule’s suggested options and regulatory text do not address these problems but will 
likely exacerbate them as applied to protecting tribal reserved rights. The one provision of proposed 
regulatory text at 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(c)(3) is too vague to ensure protection or meaningful review. It does 
not include the limitations on the antidegradation policy described in the preamble of the rule, limitations 
that would be necessary in order to protect tribal reserved rights when applying the antidegradation 
policy. See 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371 (discussion of “Option 1” and “Option 2” for implementing 
antidegradation requirements to protect tribal reserved rights through use of Tier 3 and Tier 2 
designations). The preamble’s discussion and suggested alternatives do not offer any solace as: 1) the 
preamble is not enforceable and 2) it itself does not contain any mandatory protective requirements. 
EPA’s decades of experience should make clear that protecting tribal reserved rights cannot be left solely 
to the whims of the states’ antidegradation policies and decisions without firm requirements and 
guidance. Moreover, it is not clear how the sole use of antidegradation policies would help waters that are 
currently impaired improve water quality to allow for the full exercise and enjoyment of reserved rights. 
Nor is it clear how the use of antidegradation policies would protect against harm to reserved rights from 
nonpoint source discharges. 
To conclude, the agency should modify proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(c)(2) to use “and” instead of 
“and/or,” thus requiring the use of antidegradation policies in addition to protective designated uses and 
criteria, rather than potentially instead of those requirements.10 The agency should also include mandatory 
and more specific regulatory language about how antidegradation policies must be implemented to protect 
tribal reserved rights, providing particular detail and emphasis regarding “Option 1.” 
3. 
EPA Should Utilize Tier 3 for Outstanding National Resource Waters to 
Protect Reserved Rights. 
Notwithstanding our objections to giving states an option to only use its antidegradation policy to 
protect tribal reserved rights and our concern regarding the lack of prescriptive language in the proposed 
regulatory text regarding how to use pertinent aspects of the antidegradation policy in waters with tribal 
reserved right, the Tribes do see a role for some aspects of antidegradation policies in the protection of 
tribal reserved rights. In 2021, EPA provided notice that it was considering proposing “Assignment of 
Tier 3 antidegradation protection (i.e., requirement to maintain and protect current and future improved 
water quality) in waters where tribal reserved rights apply and where current water quality is sufficient to 
protect those rights.” Deborah G. Nagle, Notification of Consultation and Coordination on Potential 
Revisions to the Federal Water Quality Standards Regulations to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (June 
11, 2021). This idea appears akin to “Option 1” suggested by EPA in the preamble, 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74,371, although without any regulatory text implementing the option, see id. at 74,378 (proposed 40 
C.F.R. § 131.9(c)(3)). 
Tier 3 protections apply to Outstanding National Resource Waters, which are generally 
exceptional, important, unique, or sensitive ecologically, or offer unique or important recreational uses. 
 
10 As discussed above, the proposed text at the end of § 131.9(c)(1) “and” combined with the proposed text at the 
end of § 131.9(c)(2) “and/or”, create ambiguity which of these three provisions will be required and which EPA 
would allow to be optional. The Tribes believe that § 131.9(c)(1) [designated uses], (c)(2) [criteria], and (c)(3) 
[antidegradation] should all be required or better yet, (c)(3) [antidegradation] should be moved into a separate 
subsection and include more detailed requirements. 

 
 
 
 
Page 15 of 32 
 
Tier 3 protects against any permanent degradation to these important waters; only a temporary, short-
term, and limited change in the water quality of a Tier 3 water is allowed; for example, for construction 
activities. Given the well-documented importance of tribal reserved rights, see id. at 74,363, and EPA’s 
trust responsibility to protect these rights, see Michael S. Regan, Reaffirmation of the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency’s Indian Policy (Sept. 30, 2021), https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-
09/oita-21-000-6427.pdf, it is important to ensure these waters are maintained and protected. The Tribes 
believe that high quality waters with reserved rights are a good fit for protection as Outstanding National 
Resource Waters and supports EPA’s proposed Option 1, subject to the other comments and 
qualifications stated in these comments. EPA should operationalize this option with strong regulatory 
language rather than merely describing the option in the preamble. 
Given the well-documented history of minimal ONRW designation, see, e.g., John A. Chilson, 
Keeping Clean Waters Clean: Making the Clean Water Act’s Antidegradation Policy Work, 32 U. MICH. 
J.L. REFORM 545, 547 (1999) (Attachment 13), relying on the states to designate ONRWs is insufficient. 
EPA should set up a process by which tribes can directly nominate to EPA high quality waters in areas 
where they hold reserved rights to be designated as ONRWs. That way, EPA can ensure that tribal 
nominations are given full consideration and not lost in the state process. 
4. 
Without Stronger Language, Tier 2 Is Insufficient to Protect Reserved 
Rights. 
The Tribes are concerned about the suggested “Option 2,” which would let states utilize Tier 2 
protections to limit the lowering of water quality in high quality waters (that exceed Clean Water Act 
section 101(a) uses) to protect applicable reserved rights. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371 (citing 40 C.F.R. § 
131.12(a)(2)). Tier 2 allows lowering of water quality “only in a few extraordinary circumstances where 
the economic and social need for the activity clearly outweighs the benefit of maintaining water quality 
above that required for ‘fishable/swimmable’ water, and both cannot be achieved.” EPA, Water Quality 
Standards Handbook, Chapter 4: Antidegradation, at 9 (2012). Specifically, EPA describes Option 2 as: 
“States could amend their antidegradation policy and/or other legally binding procedures to include a 
provision that ensures that any lowering of water quality in a high-quality water that is authorized by the 
state, in accordance with 40 CFR 131.12(a)(2), results in water quality that continues to protect applicable 
reserved rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,271.  
To begin, the Tribes assume that EPA intends for Tier 2 to be used only where water quality 
exceeds the quality necessary for the full unsuppressed use of tribal reserved rights, and not just Clean 
Water Act section 101(a) designated uses. However, that is not clear from the proposed language and 
preamble, so should be clarified. And the Tribes note, as explained above, that this option would not help 
waters whose quality is below the level necessary for the unsuppressed use of reserved rights. 
Fundamentally, the Tribes are concerned with how even the best-intentioned states might weigh 
important economic or social development in the area against maintaining high water quality that protects 
tribal reserved rights. If given the option, we are not confident that the reserved rights sacred to a tribe 
would prove more consequential to the state than other policy goals it must weigh, at least not 
consistently. And as explained above, without specific regulatory language, it is not clear how Option 2 
would actually be implemented or enforced to ensure a thumb on the scale in favor of tribal reserved 
rights. The bottom line is that EPA would need to include strong mandatory language in the regulatory 
text itself if this is offered as a potential measure of protection to states. And it should not be available as 

 
 
 
 
Page 16 of 32 
 
a sole measure of protection. 
Tier 2’s exceptions allowing some level of water quality degradation of a high-quality water 
based on economic and social considerations are distressing where reserved rights are at issue. Water 
contamination threatens traditional Indian lifeways, including longstanding traditions of fishing and fish 
consumption that are central to many tribes’ cultural identity and that make individual tribes distinct as 
people. Further, many tribes are connected to particular waters for cultural, spiritual, or other reasons (and 
others’ fishing rights are limited to certain grounds by treaty), so tribal members cannot simply move 
their fishing to another location to avoid contamination or lowered water quality. The benefits of 
protecting high water quality to tribes in terms of public health, environmental, cultural, and other gains 
are difficult, and in many cases impossible, to monetize or quantify. EPA has correctly recognized that 
“cultural impacts to tribes and the furtherance of the United States’ treaty obligations to tribes—are an 
example of the type of societal value that cannot be monetized.”11 Supplemental Finding That It Is 
Appropriate and Necessary To Regulate Hazardous Air Pollutants  From Coal- and Oil-Fired Electric 
Utility Steam Generating Units, 81 Fed. Reg. 24,420, 24,429 n.18 (April 25, 2016); see also 87 Fed. Reg. 
at 74,374 (qualitatively describing variety of unique benefits from proposed rule). Most of the benefits 
from high water quality to tribal health, subsistence, fishing rights, and cultural identity defy full 
calculation. See, e.g., Cass R. Sunstein, The Limits of Quantification, 102 CALIF. L. REV. 1369, 1380-85 
(2014) (Attachment 17); United States v. Washington, 384 F. Supp. 312, 404 (W.D. Wash. 1974) (“[T]he 
treaty rights . . . are unique and the damages which have been or will be sustained are not susceptible of 
definite monetary determination.”); see also 2019 NCAI et al. Comments on MATS Rule Reconsideration 
of Supplemental Finding and Residual Risk at 10-13 (Attachment 18). States, with their own objectives, 
are unlikely to want—or even be able—to successfully evaluate a tribal member’s ability to continue to 
engage in the fishing culture practiced since time immemorial by her ancestors, and to pass those 
traditions on to her children. But that does not mean that these core values can be excluded when 
weighing whether lowering water quality is necessary to accommodate important economic or social 
development or choosing from a range of practicable alternatives that would prevent or lessen the 
 
11 Even economists that have attempted to place a value on subsistence fishing have acknowledged that such 
valuation cannot capture the social and cultural aspects of subsistence fishing. For instance, while taking no position 
on the accuracy of the analysis, we note the Army Corps of Engineers stated: 
It is recognized that the household decision to participate in subsistence activities has a number of 
components beyond the provision of food. There are also social elements to subsistence, including 
education and cultural elements, the expression of ethics and values, tribal identity, spirituality and 
ideology, and traditional knowledge and language, in addition to health benefits. . . . [I]t is not 
possible to determine how much of the total valuation of subsistence activity comes from the 
provision of food, and how much comes from the expression of social and cultural values. 
Production cost is, therefore, only a partial proxy for total subsistence value, and does not measure 
the social and cultural aspects of subsistence. 
U.S. Army Corps Engineers, Great Lakes and Mississippi River Interbasin Study Team, Treaty Rights and 
Subsistence Fishing in the U.S. Waters of the Great Lakes, Upper Mississippi River, and Ohio River Basins (June 
2012) at 61, available at https://glmris.anl.gov/documents/docs/Subsistence_Fishing_Report.pdf (Attachment 16). 

 
 
 
 
Page 17 of 32 
 
degradation.12  
Because of this problem, the Tribes do not support the use of Tier 2, at least as the sole protective 
measure, for tribal reserved rights. Should EPA move forward with utilizing Tier 2 as an option in 
combination with other requirements, EPA should incorporate additional language that assures these 
important tribal interests are prioritized to assure they are properly accounted for and protected. EPA and 
states should recognize that a state’s evaluation must begin from a balance favoring protecting water 
quality and reserved rights that otherwise may not get captured in the state’s economic balancing. 
B. 
Description of Definition of “Tribal Reserved Rights” Is Underinclusive 
EPA requested comment on whether additional types of reserved rights should be included 
beyond fishing, gathering of aquatic plants, and hunting for aquatic dependent animals in its definition of 
“tribal reserved rights.” See 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,367 (“Examples of tribal reserved rights as defined in this 
proposed rulemaking include but are not limited to the rights to fish; gather aquatic plants; and to hunt for 
aquatic-dependent animals. EPA requests comment on whether there are additional types of tribal 
reserved rights that it should consider.”). The answer is yes. While tribal reserved rights certainly extend 
to each of the already enumerated rights, tribes reserved more water-dependent rights than those 
specifically listed in the Federal Register notice. While the actual language proposed for the definition at 
40 C.F.R. § 131.3(r) would encompass these rights, the supporting materials—including the preamble to 
the final rule and the response to comments—should include a more comprehensive list of rights covered 
by the rule. EPA should also make clear that this definition of “tribal reserved rights” applies only to this 
rule as tribes have other reserved rights that extend beyond aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources. 
Ultimately, it may not be possible for all types of aquatic and aquatic-dependent tribal reserved rights to 
be explicitly highlighted in this administrative record, but common ones should be and EPA should make 
clear that just because a right has not been listed in the preamble or response to comments does not mean 
that it is not covered by the rule.    
Many tribes engage in water-dependent ceremonies and cultural events in which tribal members 
come into direct contact with water, such as during canoe journeys, boat dances, sweat lodges, and in-
water ceremonies. Poor water quality can directly affect those ceremonies and cultural events. For 
instance, the Suquamish Indian Tribe recently settled a Clean Water Act action against King County, 
Washington, which was prompted, in part, by untreated sewage discharges from a county wastewater 
treatment plant on the opposite side of Puget Sound that reached Suquamish shores just as tribal members 
from across Puget Sound were arriving during the annual Canoe Journey. Washing stations had to be set 
up, so that the Tribe’s guests could clean themselves after paddling through contaminated off-reservation 
 
12 We note that even EPA has had difficulty with the concept of taking qualitative benefits properly into account 
when engaged in economic analyses during certain administrations. EPA recently acknowledged this failing itself. 
See EPA, National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Coal- and Oil-Fired Electric Utility Steam 
Generating Units – Revocation of the 2020 Reconsideration, and Affirmation of the Appropriate and Necessary 
Supplemental Finding (pre-publication version) at 86, available at 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-
02/6716.2_MATS%20A_N_Final%20Rule_20230213_SPPD.admin__0.pdf (“The decision framework in the 2020 
Final Action, however, did not give ‘less weight’ to these factors – it effectively gave them none.”). Given even the 
federal Trustee’s track record with these types of issues, relying on states to protect tribal reserved rights using Tier 
2 protections provides little comfort. 

 
 
 
 
Page 18 of 32 
 
waters and stepping into fouled waters on the reservation’s shores. See, e.g., Lynda V. Mapes, Suquamish 
Tribe Intends to Sue King County after 2019 Tribal Canoe Journey Marred by Wastewater Spill, 
SEATTLE TIMES (July 23, 2020), available at https://www.seattletimes.com/seattle-
news/environment/suquamish-tribe-intends-to-sue-king-county-after-2019-tribal-canoe-journey-marred-
by-wastewater-spill/ (Attachment 19) (including photographs showing tribal members in water around 
canoe). While portions of this example took place on the Tribe’s reservation, where currently only EPA 
has authority to set WQS, the entirety of the example is representative of the type of harm that poor water 
quality can have on reserved ceremonial and cultural uses that may take place in waters where a state has 
authority to set WQS. 
Tribes across the country also have reserved water rights that must be protected. In Winters v. 
United States, the Supreme Court recognized that when land has been reserved to a tribe, a reservation of 
water sufficient to meet the purposes of the reservation is implied. 207 U.S. 564, 576-77 (1908); see also, 
e.g., Cappeart v. United States, 426 U.S. 128, 139 (1976); Arizona v. California, 373 U.S. 546, 597-602 
(1963); Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians v. Coachella Valley Water Dist., 849 F.3d 1262, 1270 
(9th Cir. 2017) (“[T]he primary purpose underlying the establishment of the reservation was to create a 
home for the Tribe, and water was necessarily implicated in that purpose.”). In many cases, the water 
reserved by a tribe originates outside of its reservation and flows downstream to the reservation. The 
Winters reserved water right entitles the tribe to a quantity of water sufficient to meet the purposes of the 
reservation, but the water must also be of sufficient quality to meet the purposes. Cohen’s Handbook of 
Federal Indian Law—the seminal treatise in the field—states as follows:  
To meet federal purposes, Indian reserved water rights should be protected against . . . 
impairments of water quality, as well as against diminutions in quantity. . . . Fulfilling the 
purposes of Indian reservations depends on the tribes receiving water of adequate quality 
as well as sufficient quantity. . . . The quality of the water necessary for [tribal] uses may 
vary from the high quality needed for human consumption to a lesser quality for fish and 
wildlife habitat to an even lower quality for irrigation. Each use, however, requires water 
that is appropriate quality to support that use.  
The quality and quantity of water may be directly related. This interrelationship is most 
evident in the case of a reserved right to water for fisheries preservation. The right 
reserved is that amount of water necessary to maintain the fishery. The fishery consists 
not only of the fish themselves, but also of the conditions necessary to their survival. 
Thus, habitat protection is an integral component of the reserved right. In order to protect 
the fishery habitat, tribes should have a right not only to a sufficient amount of water, but 
also to water that is of adequate quality. 
COHEN’S HANDBOOK OF FEDERAL INDIAN LAW § 19.03[9], at 1236 (Nell Jessup Newton ed., 2012) 
(footnotes and citations omitted). In the Federal Register notice, EPA indicates that “[t]ribal reserved 
rights as defined in this proposed rulemaking generally do not address the quantification of Winters 
rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,363. However, as noted above, the quality and quantity of water may be 
directly related. For instance, for a tribe with a Winters reserved water right that requires water sufficient 
to support fishing on a reservation, what happens upstream of the reservation with respect to water 
quantity may diminish water quality both outside and within the reservation. A good example is 
temperature impacts from upstream diversions. A stream may become water quality impaired for 
temperature if too much water has been diverted from the stream; in turn, this may affect fish dependent 

 
 
 
 
Page 19 of 32 
 
on cold water both outside and within the tribe’s reservation. This is an increasingly important issue in 
light of increased pressures from climate change, as EPA generally acknowledges. See 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74,366. In that case, the “tribal reserved right” in this rule should include the Tribe’s Winters reserved 
water right to protect the water quality before it reaches the reservation, even if the quantity of water is 
also implicated. Moreover, sometimes protection of the Winters reserved water right will have nothing to 
do with quantity. For instance, if a tribe has a Winters reserved water right for economic development, 
drinking water, or some other purpose, an upstream state must protect the water quality required to meet 
each such use before the water to which the tribe is entitled reaches the reservation, which may include 
more protective criteria to preventing pollutants from being discharged upstream of the reservation that 
would impair the Winters right.13  
At proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(r), the rule defines “tribal reserved rights” as “any rights to 
aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, 
through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of Federal law.” This language is broad 
enough to encompass ceremonial uses and Winters reserved water rights, as it must. However, EPA’s 
decision not to include “water” itself among the list of enumerated examples of tribal reserved rights (87 
Fed. Reg. at 74,367) and its statement that the definition generally does not include quantification of 
Winters rights (87 Fed. Reg. at 74,363) could be used to suggest that Winters rights need not be protected 
under the rule. This cannot be, and the preamble and response to comments for the final rule must make it 
clear that the water quality needed for Winters reserved water rights to fulfill the purposes of a reservation 
must be maintained or achieved. The same is true for ceremonial uses of water wherever tribes reserved 
such rights in areas where states or EPA may promulgate water quality standards. 
In EPA’s description of the “tribal reserved rights” definition, the agency notes that the proposed 
definition “does not apply to unratified treaties or reserved rights that have been abrogated or otherwise 
superseded.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,366. The Tribes do not take exception to this language but note for the 
record that many states do not seem to understand or accept that only Congress has the authority to 
abrogate a reserved right and that any such abrogation must be explicit. E.g., United States v. Dion, 476 
U.S. 734, 738-39 (1986) (“We have required that Congress’ intention to abrogate Indian treaty rights be 
clear and plain.”); Washington v. Wash. Com. Passenger Fishing Vessel Ass’n, 443 U.S. 658, 690 (1979) 
(“Absent explicit statutory language, we have been extremely reluctant to find congressional abrogation 
of treaty rights. . . .”). While some states may wish that treaties or other sources of reserved rights did not 
exist or claim that circumstances have changed such that the reserved rights have been relinquished, EPA, 
in coordination with affected rights holders, will need to ensure that such erroneous positions are provided 
no credence.14 If a state asserts abrogation of a tribal reserved right as a basis for not protecting it in its 
 
13 Similar arguments can be made that some waters outside of the waters in which a tribe might hold its reserved 
fishing rights may still require more protective WQS to protect tribal reserved rights where such waters are 
necessary to support the right. For instance, anadromous salmon and steelhead travel away from tribal usual and 
accustomed areas at points in their life cycles. Habitat on which they depend when they are outside of the U&A 
should still be sufficiently protective so as not to undermine the tribal reserved right when they return to or pass 
through the U&A. 
14 In the preamble, EPA posits a question regarding whether in a situation in which “a waterbody may not be able to 
support a reserved right to an aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resource because attaining that use in that waterbody 
is not currently feasible,” the state could revise its designated uses to remove the tribal reserved rights use following 
a use attainability analysis. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,372. We do not believe either EPA or the state would have that 
option. While such an administrative action would have no legal bearing on the tribe’s reserved rights, Clean Water 

 
 
 
 
Page 20 of 32 
 
water quality standards, the burden must be on the state to provide explicit, clear, and plain Congressional 
authority supporting its position rather than shifting the burden to the tribe to prove that there is no such 
authority.  
C. 
The “Right Holder” Definition Is Acceptable But Its Use Does Not Make Sense at 
One Point in the Proposed Regulatory Language. 
EPA proposes to define “right holders” at 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(s) as “tribes holding rights to aquatic 
and/or aquatic-dependent resources pursuant to an applicable treaty, statute, executive order, or other 
source of Federal law.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,366, 74,378. The Tribes do not object to this definition but 
note that use of the term “right holder” does not make sense in at least one circumstance in which it has 
been used in the regulatory scheme. At 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(2), the proposed language states that WQS 
must be established to protect “[t]he health of the right holders to at least the same risk level as provided 
to the general population of the State.” It would be better to use another term besides “right holders” in 
this instance since EPA presumably means individual tribal members rather than a tribe in this provision. 
A phrase such as “right holder’s members” or “right holder’s population” could be substituted in this 
provision. In other instances, such as the information sharing provision at 40 C.F.R. § 131.6(g)(1) and the 
tribal consultation provision at 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(b), the use of the term “right holders” makes sense as 
these activities would involve the affected tribe. The Tribes also note that the definition of “right holders” 
could be shortened to: “tribes holding tribal reserved rights,” assuming the agency does not make any 
changes to the definition of “tribal reserved rights” proposed for 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(r). As it stands now, 
the language in 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(s) is somewhat redundant to the definition at § 131.3(r). 
D. 
The Types of Historic Information to Determine the Level of Water Quality 
Necessary to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights Should Include Indigenous Traditional 
Ecological Knowledge, and Funding Should Be Provided to Ensure Sufficient Data 
and Information Is Available to Support Protective WQS.  
EPA has requested comment on the types of information that states and EPA should consider in 
determining the level of water quality necessary to protect tribal reserved rights. EPA writes:  
Determining the level of water quality necessary to protect any aquatic or aquatic-
 
Act actions should not be taken that suggest a right no longer exists or create confusion for the public in that regard. 
Instead, the CWA should only be”[striving] for attainment of such uses to protect a tribal reserved right consistent 
with the obligations of treaties and other Federal Laws.” Id. Further, where some level of reserved right use, even if 
severely suppressed, is being attained, the state would have no authority to remove that existing use under EPA’s 
existing implementing regulations. 40 C.F.R. §131.10(g) (“States may designate a use, or remove a use that is not an 
existing use, if the State conducts a use attainability analysis . . . .”). In short, if a tribe has reserved rights in a water 
body in which a state has jurisdiction to set WQS, that reserved right must be a designated use, and EPA should not 
afford the state an opportunity or any authority to remove that designated use unless and until Congress explicitly 
and plainly abrogates that right. In extremely limited circumstances, a WQS variance that conforms to the 
requirements in 40 C.F.R. § 131.14 may be available. However, as EPA is well aware, “[w]here a State adopts a 
WQS variance, the State must retain, in its standards, the underlying designated use and criterion addressed by the 
WQS variance.” 40 C.F.R. § 131.14(a)(2). Any such variance would need to be approved by EPA after consultation 
with right holders. As the Tribes’ trustee, we expect that EPA would adhere to the right holder’s position on the 
variance. 

 
 
 
 
Page 21 of 32 
 
dependent resource or users of that resource can be a complex endeavor that involves 
weighing multiple lines of evidence. However, this endeavor will largely mirror the 
process states already follow in developing their WQS. Examples of such evidence 
include fish consumption rate surveys, studies or accounts of heritage fish consumption 
rates, peer-reviewed articles or reports on the types and levels of pollutants that can 
adversely affect the resource in question, and monitoring data reflecting historic and/or 
current water quality. EPA requests comment on the types of historic information that 
states and EPA should consider. 
87 Fed. Reg. at 74,368 (emphasis added). The Tribes agree that each of these categories of information is 
an appropriate type of information for states and EPA to consider in determining the level of water quality 
necessary to protect tribal reserved rights (i.e., in setting criteria). In addition, however, we emphasize the 
need for states and EPA to consider Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge (ITEK) in their 
development of water quality standards. Further, some level of funding must be made available by the 
federal government to ensure that the requirement in proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a) indicating that states 
and EPA must rely on “available data and information” to establish WQS that protect 1) the exercise of 
tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or aquatic-dependent resource availability and 2) 
tribal member health can be fulfilled. Otherwise, there is a risk that relevant information may not be 
readily available, which may derail urgently needed improvements in water quality. 
 
 
1. 
Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge (ITEK) 
On November 15, 2021, the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) and 
the White House Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) jointly released a memorandum that commits 
to elevating Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge (ITEK) in federal scientific policy processes. 
Office of Science and Technology Policy, Council on Environmental Quality Indigenous Traditional 
Ecological Knowledge and Federal Decision Making (Nov. 15, 2021) [2021 White House 
Memorandum], available at https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/111521-OSTP-
CEQ-ITEK-Memo.pdf. This memorandum formally recognized ITEK as one of many bodies of 
knowledge that are valuable to improving policy making and recognizes that its inclusion in federal 
policy making is “[c]onsistent with the Administration’s additional commitment to scientific integrity and 
knowledge and evidence-based policymaking.” Id. at 1. On November 30, 2022, the White House 
followed up on this memorandum with “Guidance for Federal Departments and Agencies on Indigenous 
Knowledge” (https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/OSTP-CEQ-IK-Guidance.pdf) 
and an associated memorandum on “Implementation of Guidance for Federal Departments and Agencies 
on Indigenous Knowledge” (https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/IK-Guidance-
Implementation-Memo.pdf). These documents are “intended to promote and enable a government-wide 
effort to improve the recognition and inclusion of Indigenous Knowledge” in “research, policy, and other 
decision making,” including review and approval of state water quality standards. Nov. 30, 2022 
Implementation of Guidance Memorandum at 1; see also November 30, 2022 Guidance Memorandum at 
4-5 (“Indigenous Knowledge can provide accurate information, valuable insights, and effective practices 
that complement practices and knowledge derived from other approaches. For example, at times 
Indigenous Knowledge holders have observed early and accurate detection of environmental changes, 
such as interconnected patterns of species, signs of drought, or impacted water quality.”). 
The 2021 White House Memorandum defined “ITEK [as] a body of observations, oral and 
written knowledge, practices, and beliefs that promote environmental sustainability and the responsible 

 
 
 
 
Page 22 of 32 
 
stewardship of natural resources through relationships between humans and environmental systems.” Id. 
at 2. As far as we are aware, EPA has not yet adopted its own definition of ITEK, but it has employed the 
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service’s definition in prior guidance: 
Also called by other names including Indigenous Knowledge or Native Science, 
(hereafter, TEK) refers to the evolving knowledge acquired by indigenous and local 
peoples over hundreds or thousands of years through direct contact with the environment. 
This knowledge is specific to a location and includes the relationships between plants, 
animals, natural phenomena, landscapes and timing of events that are used for lifeways, 
including but not limited to hunting, fishing, trapping, agriculture, and forestry. TEK is 
an accumulating body of knowledge, practice, and belief, evolving by adaptive processes 
and handed down through generations by cultural transmission, about the relationship of 
living beings (human and non-human) with one another and with the environment. It 
encompasses the world view of indigenous people which includes ecology, spirituality, 
human and animal relationships, and more. 
EPA Re: “Considering Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) During the Cleanup Process (Jan. 3, 
2017), available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-
10/documents/considering_traditional_ecological_knowledge_tek_during_the_cleanup_process_updated_
link.pdf (quoting Sarah Rinkevich et al., Traditional Ecological Knowledge for Application by Service 
Scientists Fact Sheet, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Native American Program. (Feb. 2011)). As 
suggested by the definitions above, ITEK has been identified with several names, including “Traditional 
Ecological Knowledge” (TEK) and “Indigenous Knowledge,” but all retain a common theme: Indigenous 
knowledge systems are based on intense, place-based observations that have evolved, and continue to 
evolve, over millennia. Indigenous knowledge survives and adapts as it is passed from one generation to 
the next through the exercise of cultural practices.  
Increasingly, non-Indigenous scientists and policy makers recognize the importance of ITEK in 
decision-making, including the connections it demonstrates between biological, physical, cultural, and 
spiritual systems. The White House recognizes ITEK “as one of the many important bodies of knowledge 
that contributes to the scientific, technical, social, and economic advancements of the United States and to 
our collective understanding of the natural world.” 2021 White House Memorandum at 1. Likewise, 
EPA’s 2014 Policy on Environmental Justice for Working with Federally Recognized Tribes and 
Indigenous People (https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2017-10/documents/ej-indigenous-policy.pdf), 
“encourages as appropriate and to the extent practicable and permitted by law, the integration of 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge into the agency’s environmental science, and policy decision-making 
processes to address environmental justice concerns and facilitate program implementation.” Id. at 3. 
Certainly, ITEK must be considered in determining the level of water quality necessary to protect “tribal 
reserved rights” under the rule.  
 
EPA must be mindful that tribes may have confidentiality concerns with respect to ITEK and 
other types of tribal history and knowledge. As EPA acknowledged in its 2014 Environmental Justice 
Policy (page 3), “The EPA considers confidentiality concerns regarding information on sacred sites, 
cultural resources, and other traditional knowledge, as permitted by law. The EPA acknowledges that 
unique situations and relationships may exist in regard to sacred sites.” Before seeking ITEK from “right 
holders,” EPA should, at a minimum, observe the cautions laid out in the Nov. 30, 2022 White House 
Guidance (pages 15-16) regarding conducting an initial meeting, so that ITEK holders are aware of how 

 
 
 
 
Page 23 of 32 
 
the information will be used and the extent to which it can be made available to states or the public at 
large. Likewise, it should provide guidance and a process for states to use in handling such information. 
2.  
Federal Funding 
Ensuring that the type of information necessary to meet the requirements of proposed 40 C.F.R. § 
131.9(a) (“to the extent supported by available data and information”) takes resources. It is not cheap or 
easy to complete things like fish consumption surveys, toxicology studies, interviews with tribal elders to 
record ITEK and oral histories, etc. Both tribes and states are likely to require resources in order to ensure 
that the information EPA is calling for is available and does not present an unintended barrier to 
promulgation and approval of WQS that actually protect tribal reserved rights. A good example of the 
type of study that could inform unsuppressed levels of fish consumption is the Wabanaki Traditional 
Cultural Lifeways Exposure Pathway Scenario (July 2009), available at 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-08/documents/ditca.pdf (Attachment 20). The Wabanaki 
study was funded by EPA through a Direct Implementation Tribal Cooperative Agreement, peer-
reviewed, and specifically designed for use in reviewing and developing water quality standards. It 
provides a numerical representation of the environmental contact, diet, and exposure pathways of people 
fully using natural resources and pursuing traditional cultural lifeways. Wabanaki Study at 7-10; see also 
81 Fed. Reg. 23,239, 23,246 (April 20, 2016) (quoting purpose of study as “to describe the lifestyle that 
was universal when resources were in better condition and that some tribal members practice today (and 
many more that are waiting to resume once restoration goals and protective standards are in place)”). The 
study breaks down consumption levels based on the estimated range of diets that reflect three traditional 
lifestyle modes reflective of different habitat types. Another good example of this type of EPA-tribal 
funding partnership is the fish consumption survey completed for the Columbia Basin Treaty Tribes by 
the Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission (CRITFC), which was a project funded through a 
cooperative agreement between CRITFC and the EPA’s Office of Policy, Planning and Evaluation. 
CRITFC, A Fish Consumption Survey of the Umatilla, Nez Perce, Yakama, and Warm Springs Tribes of 
the Columbia River Basin: Technical Report 94-3 (Oct. 1994), available at https://www.critfc.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/06/94-3report.pdf (Attachment 21). We request that EPA discuss in its response to 
comments how the agency intends and plans to ensure that federal funding is available to help tribes 
gather or develop the information necessary to ensure rapid progress on WQS improvements is not 
thwarted by a lack of available information. Further, EPA should ensure that it does not set too onerous a 
threshold for the data and information required to meet the language of 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a) (“available 
data and information”) in either practice or guidance documents that would prevent improvements on a 
prompt timeline. 
E. 
EPA Is Correct to Account for Suppression Effects Explicitly in the Language of the 
Proposed Rule.  
The Tribes wholeheartedly agree with EPA that the WQS must be set to protect the exercise of 
tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or the availability of the resource at issue. Without 
such a provision, water quality standards will only protect the unsatisfactory status quo in which tribal 
members consume fish at rates far below heritage rates of consumption when fish and shellfish were more 
abundant and tribal members did not need to be fearful of eating too much seafood due to toxic 
contamination. This is the present circumstance throughout much, if not all, of the Tribes’ usual and 
accustomed areas. In 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a), EPA proposes the following language:  

 
 
 
 
Page 24 of 32 
 
(a) Water quality standards must protect tribal reserved rights applicable to waters 
subject to such standards. To protect tribal reserved rights, water quality standards must, 
to the extent supported by available data and information, be established to protect: 
(1) The exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of 
the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource; and 
(2) The health of the right holders to at least the same risk level as provided to the 
general population of the State. 
87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378. We believe this proposed regulatory language does a good job of pointing out—
and requiring states to address—the problem of suppression, both in terms of the effects of depressed 
supplies of aquatic resources resulting from degraded water quality and the effects of contamination on 
tribal member health. “EPA request[ed] comment on whether additional language should be included in 
the final rule specifying the considerations for determining unsuppressed WQS.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,369. 
While we do not have specific suggestions for more detail in the proposed regulatory language itself, we 
do believe it will be incumbent upon EPA to ensure its guidance documents, including documents such 
EPA’s Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human Health 
(2000), are updated to be consistent with the CWA’s implementing regulations. Moreover, specific 
guidance documents may be required to implement this new rule, and consistent application of this 
provision may benefit especially from such guidance. 
 
Related to tribal reserved fishing rights, the National Environmental Justice Council explains: “A 
‘suppression effect’ occurs when a fish consumption rate (FCR) for a given population, group, or tribe 
reflects a current level of consumption that is artificially diminished from an appropriate baseline level of 
consumption for that population, group, or tribe. The more robust baseline level of consumption is 
suppressed, inasmuch as it does not get captured by the FCR.” NEJAC, Fish Consumption and 
Environmental Justice, at 43-45 (Nov. 2002) (Attachment 22). We have attached the comments from both 
the Northwest Indian Fish Commission (Attachment 23 at 33, 36, 71, 76) and Ridolfi Environmental 
(Attachment 24 at 7-9) regarding the Washington human health criteria, which discuss the effects of 
suppression on contemporary fish consumption surveys and the need to determine and use heritage rates 
in establishing WQS. The Federal Register notice indicates that EPA is not necessarily proposing to 
return waterbodies to a “condition that existed at the time a reserved right was established, 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74,366-67, citing the Grand Coulee Dam as the type of condition that revised WQS are not able to fully 
account for due to the dam’s depletion of fish populations available for tribal member consumption. Id. 
However, “the regulation is intended to result in WQS that protect reasonably anticipated future uses, 
taking into account factors that may have substantially altered a water body,” id. at 74,367. The Federal 
Register notice also notes, “the unsuppressed level or use of a resource should account for situations 
where restoration efforts are planned or underway (e.g., efforts to improve habitat or reduce 
contamination), such that it would be reasonable to expect the opportunities for use of the resource to 
increase in the future.” Id. at 74,369. While we agree with this latter sentiment, EPA must not allow 
legacy pollution and levels of pollution to be locked in place just because there is long-standing 
infrastructure or industrial use that has depleted the quality of water in a water body. Dams come down 
(just look at the Elwha River) and legacy pollution can be cleaned up and habitat restored (each of our 
Tribes is involved in various Trustee Council processes to address Natural Resource Damages, for 
example), so we are discomforted by the idea that historic wrongs may be built into a diminished baseline 
from which the level of protection necessary for the tribal reserved right WQS will be assessed. As the 

 
 
 
 
Page 25 of 32 
 
agency acknowledges, EPA should be forcing action rather than reinforcing an existing suppressed use or 
“set[ting] in motion a ‘downward spiral’ of further reduction/suppression.” Id. at 74,369. As a trustee with 
fiduciary obligations to the tribes, EPA must apply its authority to prompt restoration, not maintain the 
status quo. 
EPA notes that determining levels for the unsuppressed exercise of tribal reserved rights would 
need to be based on “available data and information” without specifying what types of data and 
information states or EPA may rely on. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378. In an earlier section, we note the types of 
information that might be used, but we do want to make clear that this proposal calls for caution. For 
example, as described above, contemporary fish consumption surveys may indicate lower rates of fish 
consumption than historic levels or the levels to which those exercising reserved rights are entitled. 
Consequently, as suggested above, EPA should include language in the rule, preamble, response to 
comments, and guidance documents that would require states and EPA to rely on available ITEK, other 
tribal accounts of unsuppressed rates, historical or anthropological reports of the exercise of tribal 
reserved rights, or studies of the historical exercise of tribal reserved rights, so that WQS do not end up 
protecting only for a suppressed status quo. If these types of information are available, they should 
supersede other available data or information.15 If these types of information are not available at the time 
of a triennial review, as suggested above, EPA should make grants or other funding available for studies 
of the unsuppressed exercise of tribal reserved rights to be completed before the next triennial review, so 
that suppression effects can be corrected.  
IV. 
TRIBAL CONSULTATION AND PRACTICALITIES OF RULE IMPLEMENTATION 
We conclude with one of our—if not the—greatest concerns about the proposed Reserved Rights 
Rule. As described at the outset of this letter, when our ancestors entered treaties with the Federal 
government in 1855, we gave up vast swaths of our ancestral territory while reserving certain essential 
rights to ourselves in order to perpetuate our existence then and forever. As sovereigns, the off-
reservation usufructuary rights that our forebears fought hard to reserve—and which we continue every 
day to fight hard to protect for the generations to come—are some of our most sacred and fundamental 
rights. We know these rights better than anyone else. We can speak authoritatively to these rights when 
others cannot. While we deeply appreciate EPA’s efforts through this proposed rule to protect our 
reserved rights, the proposed rule is flawed in the process it describes for determining if and where tribal 
reserved rights apply, and with whom it places that power. The rule must be corrected on this score before 
 
15 In the Federal Register notice, EPA writes, “Where information is conflicting, there are gaps in information, 
and/or a difference of opinion exists between the state and one or more tribes about the level of water quality 
necessary to protect a reserved right, EPA will take action based on the best available information in the same way 
that EPA currently makes WQS decisions in these circumstances in other contexts, e.g., determining whether criteria 
are scientifically defensible in situations where there is conflicting science, there are gaps in the science, and/or there 
are different conclusions among stakeholders. EPA requests comment on whether there are other factors it should 
consider when making decisions under these circumstances.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371. We do not generally have a 
concern about this approach, except that where there is conflicting information about which a tribe would know 
more than a state (e.g., the existence and level of use of the tribe’s own reserved rights) or where there is “a 
difference of opinion . . . between [a] state and one or more tribes about the level of water quality necessary to 
protect a reserved right,” EPA should defer to, or at least weigh more heavily, the tribal position in that 
circumstance. The failure to do so may run afoul of EPA’s trust responsibility and obligations under the Clean Water 
Act and federal Indian law to ensure that tribal reserved rights are protected. 

 
 
 
 
Page 26 of 32 
 
it is finalized. 
 
The proposed rule requires that EPA consult with tribes (“right holders”) in association with the 
agency’s review of a state’s water quality standards. The proposed language at 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(b) 
states, “In reviewing State water quality standards submissions under this section, EPA will initiate tribal 
consultation with the right holders, consistent with applicable EPA tribal consultation policies, in 
determining whether State water quality standards protect applicable tribal reserved rights in accordance 
with paragraph (a) of this section.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378. The Tribes appreciate this commitment to 
tribal consultation in EPA’s review of the standards a state submits for approval, and we want to see this 
explicit commitment to consultation in the final rule (and other rules EPA is promulgating). However, we 
are concerned that the tribal consultation described in the regulatory language itself comes too late in the 
process if it only occurs after a state has already gone through its rulemaking process and submitted such 
standards to EPA for approval. If a state does not have and use the requisite information from affected 
tribes much earlier in the process, this could result in costly, lengthy delays that could have been avoided 
had an affected tribe been consulted earlier, as well as the state being less inclined to willingly incorporate 
tribal information after it has already completed its administrative process. Consequently, we believe that 
the affirmative duty for EPA to consult should be maintained in the final language of the rule, but it 
should be expanded to require early (and frequent) consultation with the right holders. We understand 
from EPA’s preamble and from government-to-government consultation that EPA appreciates the need 
for early and frequent consultation with tribes and to provide direction and guidance to states, but that 
understanding should be made a requirement in the regulatory text. Compare 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,372 
(“EPA makes itself available to engage early and often to provide support when states are adopting and 
revising WQS. . . . EPA intends to support states by providing input and information on any tribal 
reserved rights and the level of water quality to protect those rights. As previously mentioned, EPA is also 
available to facilitate dialogue between states and tribes.”), with 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378 (proposed § 
131.9(b) requiring no early consultation with tribes or states), and id. (proposed § 131.20 describing state 
review and triennial review with no reference to consultation with EPA or tribes). 
 
The language at 40 C.F.R. § 131.6(g)(1) in which EPA proposes the following language 
regarding the minimum requirements for a state’s water quality standards submission does not assuage the 
concern: 
Where applicable, information which will aid the agency in evaluating whether the 
submission protects tribal reserved rights consistent with § 131.9, including: 
(1) Information about the scope, nature, and current and past use of the tribal reserved 
rights, as informed by the right holders; and 
(2) Data and methods used to develop the water quality standards. 
87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378 (emphasis added). In fact, it causes us quite a bit of consternation, as does the 
process described (but not required) in the preamble at pages 74,367-68. Most fundamentally, the 
italicized phrase is too vague regarding tribes’ role and does not require the state to actually use the 
information provided by tribes regarding their own reserved rights. We are very concerned that states—
which frequently have the least incentive to recognize tribal reserved rights and are frequently outright 
hostile to such rights—will be opining on the existence, scope, nature, and current and past use of tribes’ 
most sacred rights without being required to accept the affected tribe’s or even the federal trustee’s 

 
 
 
 
Page 27 of 32 
 
description and assessment of these rights. We understand that states with delegated Clean Water Act 
authority over waters in which tribes hold reserved rights must have some role in developing the WQS to 
protect that use of waters over which they have jurisdiction. However, we do not believe that states can or 
should be in the driver’s seat with respect to the analysis of the topics included in proposed 40 C.F.R. § 
131.6(g)(1). While certainly not true of all states, in enough, it will put the fox in charge of the hen house, 
such that this provision is not workable from our perspective. Instead, the federal trustee, after working 
closely with an affected tribe (and the Department of Interior, if needed), must take a much more active—
and binding—role in this process in order to ensure that tribes’ sovereign interests and sacred rights are 
protected. Once the tribal reserved rights are appropriately characterized by the appropriate actors (the 
tribe, first and foremost), at that point, we could see states properly exercising their delegated authority to 
set designated uses, criteria, and antidegradation policy. We request that the final language of the rule 
reflect these comments through more detailed and binding regulatory provisions that put tribes in charge 
of characterizing their own rights. At the very least, the language of 40 C.F.R. § 131.6(g)(1) should be 
stripped down to its bare minimum, so that states (as opposed to tribes or EPA) are not charged with 
characterizing the “scope, nature, and current and past use of tribal reserved rights.” Changing that 
provision to “(1) Information about tribal reserved rights, as provided by the right holders” would provide 
us considerably more comfort about how the process might work and what its ultimate outcome might 
be.16 
Even if we could abide the placement of authority to assess tribal reserved rights in states’ hands 
(which we cannot), the proposed regulatory language is not prescriptive enough about what a state must 
do to ensure that it has appropriate information from a tribe—or that it uses it. In theory, the “as informed 
by the right holders” language above would suggest to a state that it should engage in government-to-
government consultation with tribes holding tribal reserved rights in order to ensure it has sufficient 
information about the existence, scope, nature, and current and past use of tribal reserved rights to know 
where and how to protect them through the state’s WQS. However, without more explicit, mandatory 
language, we are skeptical that robust consultation with tribes will be the outcome of this language in 
most states, particularly those that do not have an existing government-to-government consultation policy 
(or where the policy is underdeveloped or underutilized in practice). As EPA is well aware, the 
relationship between states and tribes can be fraught and very adversarial at times. Even where a tribe and 
a state have a decent, or even a very good, relationship, they may not be able to agree on what level of 
water quality will actually protect the tribal reserved rights. Consequently, we recommend more direct 
and robust regulatory language that explicitly requires states to consult with tribes at the outset of and 
 
16 At the end of its description of the process for “Determining if Tribal Reserved Rights Apply,” EPA indicates that 
“[i]n addition to seeking input from potential right holders, EPA will also consider other sources of information 
regarding applicable tribal reserved rights including the language of the treaties, statutes, or Executive orders and 
relevant judicial precedent.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,368. We note that in many cases this should be the starting and end 
point of the analysis. For instance, the United States v. Washington case area covers nearly the entire geographic 
scope of western Washington. One tribe or another has adjudicated usual and accustomed areas throughout the case 
area, and neither the State of Washington nor EPA needs to—or should—try to reinvent the wheel. Mere reference 
to the judicial opinions and findings of fact made in that case should be sufficient support for recognition of the 
tribal reserved rights that need to be protected. Other pertinent sources of information that are not listed in this 
passage include legislative history and prior federal actions in which an agency has already recognized the need to 
protect tribal reserved rights, such as prior Department of Interior or Bureau of Indian Affairs analyses or past EPA 
decisions. Good examples are the very materials that EPA cites in this preamble related to the human health criteria 
processes in Washington and Maine.  

 
 
 
 
Page 28 of 32 
 
throughout its revision process to determine whether, where, and how tribal reserved rights will be 
affected by the WQS, as well as language that establishes a presumption in favor of the use of a tribe’s 
own assessment of its rights when EPA reviews a state’s WQS submission. In addition to strengthening 
the proposed regulatory language, the Tribes suggest that EPA prepare guidance explaining how a state 
should engage in government-to-government consultation with a tribe; the value and need to accept 
Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge as relevant, reliable information; and the sensitivities and 
need for careful handling of some such information and knowledge.  
Other issues that are not accounted for in the regulatory language include: How will EPA protect 
tribes from state analyses of reserved rights that may be unsupported by law, the subject of litigation, or in 
need of update due to new information? How will EPA ensure that the wishes of a tribe that does not want 
its reserved rights to be assessed by a state at all or put in issue in a Clean Water Act administrative 
process are respected? What happens when a state ignores the information provided by a tribe or the 
federal trustee? Moreover, while the preamble notes, “where information is conflicting, there are gaps in 
information, and/or a difference of opinion exists between the state and one or more tribes about the level 
of water quality necessary to protect a reserved right, EPA will take action based on the best available 
information in the same way that EPA currently makes WQS decisions in these circumstances in other 
contexts,” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371, this may be cold comfort during certain administrations’ review of 
state water quality standards, as we saw in the human health criteria rollbacks of the last administration. 
As with preparation of materials required to determine the level of protection for tribal reserved 
rights, we are also concerned about the resources it is likely to take tribes to engage with states regarding 
the very existence of their rights. At 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,375, EPA asks for comment on the following 
conclusion, “While tribal right holders would not be direct respondents, EPA acknowledges that the 
proposed regulation would require that state submissions be informed by the right holders. EPA believes 
this would not lead to increased burden on right holders because the proposed rule would not require 
additional coordination beyond that which already occurs during WQS public participation processes and 
EPA’s consultations with tribal governments.” We disagree with this statement. While it is true that we 
and many other tribes actively participate in existing WQS public participation processes and while we 
welcome this rule, there is no question that there will be additional burdens on us and other tribes as a 
result of it. It takes time and money to engage in administrative processes, and it takes even more time 
and money to engage in administrative processes where sovereigns do not agree. In order to support 
protective criteria, we are likely to need to conduct or commission fish consumption surveys and other 
materials to establish the level of water quality necessary to protect our rights. Likewise, with respect to 
designated uses and other aspects of WQS, while we are hopeful (and expect) that Washington’s current 
Governor, Attorney General, and Department of Ecology Director will work cooperatively with our tribes 
to ensure protection of tribal reserved rights, we have no guarantee that that will be the case with future 
political leaders. After all, even with the current political actors, we had to go to the United States 
Supreme Court in 2018 to protect—and have the State accept—subsidiary aspects of our reserved fishing 
rights. With respect to characterization and geographic location of tribal reserved rights, this rule may 
necessitate additional time and cost associated with leadership-to-leadership meetings between tribes, 
states, and EPA; preparation of comments and legal analyses; and potentially even legal action. We 
therefore again request that the Federal government provide funding to help tribes engage in this process. 
Finally, EPA proposes to modify 40 C.F.R. § 131.20 to require that a state’s “triennial review 
process include an evaluation of whether there are tribal reserved rights applicable to waters subject to the 
state’s WQS and whether WQS need to be revised to protect those rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,367, 

 
 
 
 
Page 29 of 32 
 
74,378-79 (proposed § 131.20(a)). We understand that states will need a little time to implement this rule 
as practical matter and agree that the triennial review is a good way to first incorporate the Reserved 
Rights Rule’s requirements. Of course, EPA is aware that triennial reviews can sometimes be delayed and 
some are currently in process. While a gradual process may be ok (or even beneficial) in some 
circumstances), states are on notice now that a final rule is on its way, so they should begin thinking about 
whether any WQS revisions they are currently undertaking implicate tribal reserved rights. For instance, 
the Washington State Department of Ecology is currently going through revision of its aquatic life toxics 
criteria. As a result of this Federal Register notice and its experience with the human health criteria, the 
state is aware that it has obligations to set those criteria in a manner that protects tribal reserved rights. 
We do not think that potentially less protective criteria should be grandfathered in, as it were, just because 
the revision process began before the Reserved Rights Rule has been completed. A similar example might 
be where a state already has adopted a sustenance fishing designated use (like the State of Maine for 
certain waters), the state should ensure that any criteria it revises be sufficient to protect tribal reserved 
rights in those waters, regardless of when this rule is finalized.  
. 
. 
. 
To conclude, the Tribes thank EPA for recognizing the need and doing the work to ensure that 
water quality standards protect tribal reserved rights and the people who depend on exercise of their rights 
for their health and well-being, livelihoods, culture, religion, and community cohesion. We encourage you 
to move swiftly to finalize the proposed rule, but to do so with the comments made here firmly in mind. 
We do not believe EPA should finalize a rule that would allow the omission of certain components of 
WQS or that would put a state in the position of defining the scope, nature, or current or past use of a 
tribe’s reserved rights is appropriate, and we look forward to EPA refining the final rule and preamble to 
address these concerns. The Tribes also appreciate EPA’s efforts to engage in meaningful government-to-
government consultation with respect to agency rulemakings like this, which were either pro forma or 
non-existent under the prior administration. We are available and more than happy to discuss this matter 
further should you have any questions about our comments or would like to discuss possible resolutions 
to any potential problems we have identified in the proposed rule. You may contact Jane Steadman at 
jsteadman@kanjikatzen.com or 206-344-8100 with any questions you might have or to coordinate further 
discussion with our Tribes. 
Sincerely, 
/s/ Frances G. Charles  
 
 
 
 
/s/ Jeromy Sullivan 
Frances G. Charles 
 
 
 
 
 
Jeromy Sullivan 
Chairwoman, Lower Elwha Klallam Tribe 
 
 
Chairman, Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe 
 
/s/ Leonard Forsman 
Leonard Forsman 
Chairman, Suquamish Indian Tribe 
 

 
 
 
 
Page 30 of 32 
 
 
 
cc 
 
Deborah Nagle, Director, Office of Science and Technology (OST), U.S. EPA Headquarters  
Andy Byrne, Senior Advisor and Lead of the Policy and Partnership Team, American Indian 
Environmental Office, Office of International and Tribal Affairs, U.S. EPA Headquarters  
Sara Hisel-McCoy, Director, Standards and Health Protection Division of OST, U.S. EPA Headquarters  
Jennifer Brundage, Rule Manager for Proposed WQS Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved 
Rights, Standards and Health Protection Division of OST, U.S. EPA Headquarters  
Corey Buffo, Environmental Protection Specialist, U.S. EPA Headquarters 
Dan Opalski, Director, Region 10 Water Division, U.S. EPA Region 10 
Hanh Shaw, Manager, Region 10 Standards and Assessment Section, U.S. EPA Region 10 
E. Alexander Fidis, Assistant Regional Counsel, U.S. EPA Region 10 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Page 31 of 32 
 
Index of Attachments 
Attachment 1, Letter from Hilary Tompkins, Maine's WQS and Tribal Fishing Rights of Maine Tribes.pdf 
Attachment 2, Tony Schick and Maya Miller, The U.S. Promised Tribes They Would Always Have 
Fish.pdf 
Attachment 3, Maya Miller and Tony Schick, Toxic Salmon Reporting 'Deeply Troubling'.pdf 
Attachment 4, EPA, Columbia River Basin State of the River Report for Toxics.pdf 
Attachment 5, Sarah McQuate, Tire-Related Chemical is Largely Responsible for Adult Coho Salmon 
Deaths in Urban Streams.pdf 
Attachment 6, Zhenyu Tian et al., 6PPD-Quinone Revised Toxicity Assessment.pdf 
Attachment 7, Environmental Working Group, Eating One Freshwater Fish Equals a Month of Drinking 
‘Forever Chemicals’ Water.pdf 
Attachment 8, Nicole Ogrysko, New Research Shows Dangers of Consuming Freshwater Fish Laced with 
PFAS.pdf 
Attachment 9, Lynda Mapes, Drugs Found in Puget Sound Salmon From Tainted Wastewater.pdf 
Attachment 10, Allegra Abramo, Outdated Sewage Treatment is Suffocating Fish in Puget Sound.pdf 
Attachment 11, Eric Barker, EPA Report Dams Play Large Role in Raising Water Temperatures.pdf 
Attachment 12, Katherine Zogas, The Clean Water Act's Antidegradation Policy Has it Been Dumped.pdf 
Attachment 13, John Chilson, Keeping Clean Waters Clean Making the Clean Water Act's 
Antidegradation Policy Work.pdf 
Attachment 14, Kent Modesitt, Antidegradation A Lost Cause or the Next Cause.pdf 
Attachment 15, 19.13 The Antidegradation Policy, Public Natural Resources Law, Second Edition.pdf 
Attachment 16, US Army Corps, Great Lakes and Mississippi River Interbasin Study Team, Treaty 
Rights and Subsistence Fishing.pdf 
Attachment 17, Cass Sunstein, The Limits of Quantification.pdf 
Attachment 18, 2019 NCAI et al. Comments on MATS Rule Reconsideration of Supplemental Finding 
and Residual Risk.pdf 

 
 
 
 
Page 32 of 32 
 
Attachment 19, Lynda Mapes, Suquamish Tribe Intends to Sue King County After 2019 Tribal Canoe 
Journey Marred by Wastewater Spill.pdf 
Attachment 20, Wabanaki Traditional cultural Lifeways Exposure Scenario.pdf 
Attachment 21, CRITFC, A Fish Consumption Survey.pdf 
Attachment 22, NEJAC, Fish Consumption and Environmental Justice.pdf 
Attachment 23, Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission Comments on EPA's 2019 Actions to Roll Back 
Washington's Human Health Water Quality Criteria.pdf 
Attachment 24, Ridolfi Environmental, Technical Review of EPA Proposal to Withdraw Federally 
Promulgated Human Health Water Quality Criteria for the State of Washington.pdf

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0174 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Via Email: Brundage.jennifer@epa.gov 
 
 
 
 
February 21, 2023 
Jennifer Brundage US Environmental Protection Agency 
William Jefferson Clinton Building 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
RE: Potential Revisions to Federal Water Quality Standards Regulations to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to submit comments as a follow up to our consultation on January 
23, 2023.  The Squaxin Island Tribe supports the Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) 
proposed amendments to the Clean Water Act (“CWA”) water quality standards (“WQS”) 
regulation because they expressly recognize that state water quality standards are subject to the 
reserved rights of tribal nations and the EPA’s fiduciary duty to protect these rights.   
 
The Squaxin Island Tribe is a federally recognized Indian tribe located in Southern Puget Sound 
in Mason County, Washington with treaty rights to harvest fish and shellfish, “at their usual and 
accustomed fishing places in the shallow bays, estuaries, inlets and open Sound of Southern Puget 
Sound and in the freshwater streams and creeks draining into those inlets.”1  (Figure 1)  The Tribe’s 
cultural and economic well-being depend upon clean water to support abundant and sustainable 
fisheries.  Thus, the Tribe has vital interests in ensuring that laws and regulations intended to 
protect water quality and related aquatic habitat, are implemented and enforced, so that it can 
continue to exercise its federal treaty rights.  
 
The Squaxin Island Tribe is uniquely positioned to offer a perspective on water quality.  The 
Tribe’s location at the south end of Puget Sound, where pollutants discharged from all parts north 
accumulate, makes water quality standards in all areas of the sound especially critical to the 
Squaxin Island Tribe.  An example of this cumulative impact is the effect of nutrient pollution on 
dissolved oxygen levels.  Nutrient discharge by wastewater treatment plants exacerbates algae 
blooms, which leads to low dissolved oxygen conditions.  Oxygen depletion is especially severe 
in shallow inlets, such as those found in South Puget Sound, and thus has a disproportionate impact 
on water quality in the Tribe’s “Usual and Accustomed” places (“U&A”) (Figure 2).  Elevated
                                                           
1 See generally United States v. Washington, 384 F.Supp. 312, 378 (W.D. Wash. 1974); United States v. 
Washington, 459 F.Supp. 1020 (W.D. Wash. 1978). 

Tribal Reserved Water Rights 
Squaxin Island Tribe to EPA 
February 21, 2023 
2 
 
levels of dissolved oxygen impact the behavior and movement of adult salmon, which has a 
negative effect on Tribal fisheries.  Harmful effects of low marine dissolved oxygen also include 
acidification, which can prevent shellfish and other marine organisms from forming shells; shifts 
in the number and types of bottom-dwelling invertebrates; increases in abundance of macroalgae, 
which can impair the health of eelgrass beds; seasonal reduction in fish habitat and intensification 
of fish kill events; and potential disruption of the entire food web.  Protective dissolved oxygen 
standards and enforcement of nutrient discharge limitations are a prime example of how WQS can 
protect tribal reserved rights.  
 
Water quality standards can also protect tribal reserved rights by ensuring the safety of both 
shellfish and finfish consumption.  Fecal coliform bacterial standards and fish consumption rates 
are set by the State of Washington through rules in the Washington Administrative Code (WAC-
173-201A-210 and WAC 173-2-1A-240).  Consideration of tribal reserved rights would secure 
regulations that limit fecal coliform bacteria in saltwater and reduce exposure to toxic substances 
through fish consumption.  For example, standards set by the State of Washington currently 
assume a fish consumption rate of 175 grams per day.  This consumption rate reflects a 2012 
compromise.  However, the Tribe expects that the fish consumption rate should be increased over 
time to 330 grams per day to reflect the true fish consumption rate of tribal members.  In doing so, 
the State would be protecting tribal reserved rights with water quality standards.   
 
For the above reasons, EPA’s proposal is positive.  However, it does raise some concerns that we 
would like the agency to consider and address as it moves forward with rulemaking. The EPA 
must clarify that tribes, not states, dictate where reserved rights are exercised and where treaty-
reserved resources exist.  Without this clarity, the state may decline to recognize resources that are 
critical to the Squaxin Island Tribe’s exercise of its reserved rights and thus fail to enact 
appropriately protective WQS.  The Squaxin Island Tribe reserves its fishing rights both on 
reservation and, importantly, throughout its U&A.  Perpetually establishing and defending these 
rights with the state would be both contrary to the law and a drain on the Tribe’s limited resources.  
The proposed rule must create an assumption that the Tribe’s assertions regarding where reserved 
rights are exercised and where treaty-reserved resources exist are conclusive.   
 
The EPA must clearly establish that the proposed rule covers connected waters that support the 
habitat of treaty-reserved resources.  As described above, the Squaxin Island Tribe exercises its 
reserved rights in interconnected waters and ecosystems that depend on healthy water quality from 
upstream sources.  Some of these water bodies may not include designated beneficial uses that 
cover treaty-reserved resources, however, these waters play a critical role in supporting the habitat 
of treaty-reserved resources and the sustainable exercise of those reserved rights.  The proposed 
rule must clarify that WQS developed to protect treaty-reserved resources and rights apply both 
within the location of place-based rights as well as in adjacent and connected waters.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on Tribal Reserved Water Rights. 
 
 
 
Erica Marbet 
Water Resources Biologist for the Squaxin Island Tribe 

Tribal Reserved Water Rights 
Squaxin Island Tribe to EPA 
February 21, 2023 
3 
 
 
Figure 1. The Usual and Accustomed Areas map is for illustrative purposes only and should not be relied 
on for any purpose other than to ascertain the general area where the Squaxin Island Tribe currently 
authorizes fishing activities under United States v. Washington. The authorized use areas for fishing are 
subject to change and should not be considered to limit the treaty rights of the Squaxin Island Tribe. 
 

Tribal Reserved Water Rights 
Squaxin Island Tribe to EPA 
February 21, 2023 
4 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Puget Sound Nutrient Source Reduction Project: 
https://www.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=2a5d5e519a9d40df8a88f6910786c51f 
The size of yellow dots is proportional to the amount of carbon and nitrogen discharged by wastewater 
treatment plants.  The number of days of the year that a location is not compliant with dissolved oxygen 
standards. In other words, dissolved oxygen concentration is below the standard set by Washington State 
(5 to 7 milligrams per liter). Darkest red indicates >120 days per year. Compare this map to Figure 1 and 
note that the southernmost inlets of Puget Sound that are out of compliance overlap the Usual and 
Accustomed Area of the Squaxin Island Tribe.  These are Henderson, Budd, Eld, Totten, 
Oakland/Hammersley, Case, and Carr Inlets, all places where the Tribe fishes.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0183 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
State Engineer's 
Office 
HERSCHLER BUILDING, 2 WEST 
CHEYENNE, WYOMING 82002 
(307) 777-6150 
MARK GORDON 
GOVERNOR 
BRANDON GEBHART, P.E. 
STATE ENGINEER 
March 3, 2023 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Submitted online via https://www.regulations.gov 
Re: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
To Whom It May Concern, 
The Wyoming State Engineer's Office (WSEO) appreciates the opportunity to comment on the 
proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
rulemaking as outlined in the December 5, 2022 Federal Register Notice. WSEO also supports 
and joins the comments from Wyoming Governor Mark Gordon and the Wyoming Department 
of Environmental Quality in whole. 
Wyoming holds title to water within its borders in a sovereign capacity as representative of all 
the people for the purpose of guaranteeing that the common rights of all are equally protected. 
Wyo. Const. art. 8 § 1; art. 1 § 31; Merrill v. Bishop, 287 P.2d 620, 625 (Wyo. 1955); See also 
Farm Inv. Co. v. Carpenter, 61 P. 258, 265 (Wyo. 1900). Wyoming constitutional and statutory 
provisions charge the State Engineer and the State Board of Control with the supervision, 
appropriation, distribution, and diversion of surface and groundwater use within the state. Wyo. 
Const. art. 8 §§ 2, 5; See, e.g., Wyo. Stat. Ann. §§ 41-4-502 through -511. The need for the state 
to control the use of its limited and precious water resources compelled Wyoming's 
Constitutional declaration of water ownership, and its history of water law and water 
administration that has since developed. 
Wyoming's Environmental Quality Act, under which Wyoming regulates water quality, further 
respects the diversion and use of water, as well as the State Engineer and State Board of 
Control's authority over those activities. "Nothing in this act shall be construed to supersede or 
abrogate any valid water right. It is recognized that diversion of water caused by the exercise of a 
valid water right is an allowable practice." Wyo. Stat. Ann. § 35-11-302(c). "Nothing in this 

act:...Limits or interferes with the jurisdiction, duties or authority of the state engineer, the state 
board of control..." Wyo. Stat. Ann. § 35-11-1104(a)(iii). 
The Clean Water Act (CWA) provides that it is the "policy of Congress to recognize, preserve, 
and protect the primary responsibilities of States to . . . plan the development and use of land and 
water resources." 33 U.S.C. § 1251(b). Additionally, the CWA states: "It is the policy of 
Congress that the authority of each State to allocate quantities of water within its jurisdiction 
shall not be superseded, abrogated or otherwise impaired by this chapter. It is the further policy 
of Congress that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to supersede or abrogate rights to 
quantities of water which have been established by any State." 33 U.S.C. § 1251(g). As 
recognized by the CWA, Wyoming has an important, sovereign interest in protecting its ability 
to plan for the use of its limited water resources, and to allocate its waters for those uses 
according to state law. The proposed rule does not give sufficient weight and deference to state 
interests, needs, priorities, and concerns. In Wyoming, where water scarcity is pervasive, it is 
important that any rule also explicitly acknowledge the primary and often exclusive role of the 
States in allocating and administering rights to the use of water under authorities to which the 
Congress has a long history of deference. 
Due in part to the widely variable nature of tribal reserved rights, the proposed rule is so vague 
and ambiguous that it is impossible to predict the full extent of its impact on Wyoming's 
exclusive authority to allocate and administer quantities of water within its jurisdiction. EPA 
acknowledges the complexity of determining the nature and geographic scope of tribal reserved 
rights, and whether they even apply in water subject to state water quality standards. At the same 
time, EPA offers no helpful guidance about making those determinations other than requiring 
engagement with potential right holders. Those potential right holders, and EPA itself, have no 
authority to determine the nature or geographic scope of tribal reserved rights outside of 
established and legally binding methods of review, as laid out in a multitude of court decisions. 
Further, no consideration is given to the holders of other lawful rights that may be impacted by 
the rule's application. In fact, EPA acknowledges its uncertainty regarding the outcome of the 
proposed rule's application. The proposed rule establishes newly created, potentially far-reaching 
consequences and concepts which are undefined and subject to agency discretion. The rule 
threatens to impair—not recognize, preserve, and protect—Wyoming's ability to plan for the use 
of its limited water resources, and to allocate its waters for those uses according to state law. 
The proposed rule was also created without state consultation. Like other states, Wyoming plays 
a significant role in ensuring effective implementation of the CWA. Our co-regulator status, 
shared by the other states and many tribes, elevates Wyoming and other co-regulators above the 
multitude of stakeholders now engaged in the public review process. It is imperative that with a 
rulemaking process of this magnitude, which directly impacts the states' implementation of 
CWA programs, that significant input and review be provided to co-regulator entities on the 
substance of the proposed rule before it is drafted. However, Wyoming and other states were not 
included in this rulemaking process in any meaningful way. 

Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the proposed rule, and we ask that EPA withdraw 
it due to its deficiencies. 
Sincerely, 
,JC,te 
Brandon Gebhart, P.E. 
Wyoming State Engineer 
Cc: 
Nolan Rap, Natural Resources Policy Advisor, Governor Mark Gordon 
Todd Parfitt, Director, Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality 
Chris Brown, Wyoming Attorney General's Office

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0251 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan 
Administrator, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington D.C. 20460 
 
Re: NWIFC Comments on Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, Proposed Water Quality 
Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
Dear Mr. Regan: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 
Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 2022).  The Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission1 (NWIFC) supports EPA’s 
commitment to honor its trust obligation to tribal nations with the proposed amendments to 
federal water quality standards (WQS) regulations to explicitly protect aquatic and aquatic-
dependent treaty reserved resources.  The amendments make clear that state water quality 
standards must be stringent enough to protect treaty-reserved rights and resources.  The proposed 
rule is an acknowledgement that the health, welfare, and culture of tribal communities in western 
Washington depend on functioning aquatic ecosystems and healthy harvestable populations of 
salmon, shellfish and other species.  The rule is also borne from the understanding that water 
quality continues to decline, is threatened by development, polluted by runoff and a warming 
climate, and therefore, WQS must be protective of treaty resources and those exercising their 
treaty-reserved rights.  Undoubtedly, new information about existing and emerging threats from 
toxic chemicals and warming waters will require revisions to state WQS to ensure tribal members 
and resources are adequately protected.  This rule proactively addresses the need for states to 
consider treaty rights when setting WQS.  NWIFC supports EPA’s initiative, and we offer the 
following comments to help strengthen the intent and implementation of the rule.  
 
EPA’s Authority  
The heart of EPA’s proposed rule is the addition of §131.9 to the WQS regulations.  This addition 
would require that WQS “protect tribal reserved rights applicable to the waters subject to such 
standards.”  This requirement is supported by proposed §131.5, which requires EPA to disprove 
WQS revisions that do not meet the requirements of §131.9.  
 
 
1 The NWIFC member tribes are the Hoh, Jamestown S’Klallam, Lower Elwha Klallam, Lummi, Makah, Muckleshoot, Nisqually, 
Nooksack, Port Gamble S’Klallam, Puyallup, Quileute, Quinault, Sauk-Suiattle, Skokomish, Squaxin Island, Stillaguamish, 
Suquamish, Swinomish, Tulalip, and Upper Skagit. 

NWIFC Comments on Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, Proposed Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights  
March 6, 2023 
Page 2 
 
NWIFC supports these provisions because they are consistent with EPA’s federal trust responsibility 
to the tribes comprising the NWIFC.  Where a tribal nation has reserved treaty rights, the federal 
government has a duty to protect those rights.2  
 
Definition of Tribal Reserved Rights 
In §131.3, EPA defines “tribal reserved rights” as “any rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent 
resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, 
executive orders, or other sources of Federal law.”  We agree with EPA’s proposed definition, but 
recommend that the definition be prefaced with, “for the purposes of this Rule,” to clarify that it 
does not encompass rights to other, non-aquatic resources.  The treaty tribes in western 
Washington also reserved rights to hunt and gather, including in areas that are adjacent to waters 
covered by the proposed rule.  Many of these species could be considered “aquatic-dependent;” 
deer need clean water to drink, and plants need fresh water to grow.  We recommend EPA clarify 
the definition of “aquatic-dependent.”  
 
Protection of Treaty Rights  
Proposed §131.9(a) would require that, “to the extent supported by available data and information, 
to protect applicable tribal reserved rights WQS must be established to protect: 1) The exercise of 
tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-
dependent resource; and 2) The health of the right holders to at least the same risk level as 
provided to the general population of the State.”  
 
NWIFC agrees that that tribal reserved rights must be protected at levels unsuppressed by water 
quality or the availability of the resource.  Virtually all tribal reserved resources exist today at 
suppressed levels due to degraded habitat, including poor water quality.  As a result, the exercise of 
treaty rights has been suppressed throughout the tribes’ usual and accustomed (U&A) fishing areas, 
with many U&A’s no longer supporting treaty resources.  EPA suggests that in determining the level 
of protection required, states should balance heritage use of a resource with what is currently 
reasonably achievable for a particular waterbody.  We disagree.  This language appears to 
contradict EPA’s objective to prevent suppressed use to be hardwired into WQS or to exacerbate a 
downward spiral of reserved resources.  Nor does it reflect EPA’s fiduciary trust obligation to fully 
protect treaty resources.   
 
Historic use of treaty resources, including when the treaties were signed, is the restoration 
benchmark that tribes strive to achieve and reflects full protection when these rights were truly 
unsuppressed.  When tribes ceded the lands that now comprise western Washington and reserved 
their right to fish, hunt, and gather, it did so with the expectation that there would be fish, game, 
and berries to harvest.  The treaty right is meaningless without resources to harvest and gather.  
Under the U.S. Constitution, treaties are defined as the “supreme law of the land,” which trumps 
state law in the event of a conflict.  There was little conflict in western Washington in the early life 
of the Stevens treaties because there were plentiful fishery resources, few non-Indian fishermen, 
 
2 Parravano u. Babbitt, 70 F.3d 539, 547 (9th Cir. 1995) ("[T]he Tribes' federally reserved fishing rights are accompanied by a 
corresponding duty on the part of the government to preserve those rights.") 

NWIFC Comments on Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, Proposed Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights  
March 6, 2023 
Page 3 
 
and habitats were largely intact.  Since that time, however, treaty rights are being rendered 
meaningless because the federal and state governments continue to allow salmon habitat to be 
damaged and destroyed faster than it can be restored.  Unfortunately, this trend is not showing 
signs of improvement and is leading to the failure of salmon recovery in western Washington.  
Through the Treaty Rights at Risk Initiative, tribes have called on their federal trustee to assume 
control and responsibility for salmon recovery and to lead a more coordinated effort among federal 
agencies.  EPA’s proposed rule is a positive step in this direction.  
 
We also note some waters may not include designated beneficial uses that support treaty-reserved 
resources, like salmon rearing, spawning or migration, but may play a critical role in supporting the 
habitat of treaty resources and the sustainable exercise of treaty rights by tribal members.  Many 
NWIFC member tribes exercise their rights in interconnected waters and ecosystems that depend 
on healthy water quality from upstream sources.  EPA should clarify that WQS developed to protect 
treaty-reserved resources and rights apply both within the location of place-based rights as well as 
in adjacent and connected waters, as determined by tribes.  
 
The language in §131.9(a)(1) appears to prevent states from using the absence of a treaty resource 
in a waterbody due to a passage barrier (such as a culvert or dam) as a reason to reduce the level of 
protection in WQS, which we support.  However, EPA caveats §131.9(a)(1) with the following 
language: “WQS must protect reasonably anticipated future uses of water, not the condition of the 
water that existed when the reserved right was established.”  While EPA’s assertion may be a 
practical acknowledgment that some waters will not currently support treaty rights, nor do so in the 
near future, this caveat does not reflect NWIFC’s viewpoint on past, present or future uses of water, 
the level of restoration needed to restore conditions to a level that supports and sustains treaty 
resources, or the timeframe in which restoration may occur.  Tribes take a multi-generational 
approach to resource management.  Further, treaties are to be interpreted in the favor of tribes, as 
they would have understood them at the time the treaties were made, and any ambiguities in their 
interpretation should be construed favorably to tribes.3 
 
In general, NWIFC supports the protection of tribal reserved rights so that the health of tribal 
members will not be subject to greater risk level than the general population, as described in 
§131.9(a)(2).  This will require the mean use of a 10-6 risk level, not the “at least to the 10-5” 
referenced in the proposed rule.  WQS, including human health criteria to protect tribal members 
exercising their treaty rights, must reflect the level of protection deemed necessary by those 
holding the right and the needs of the resource.   
 
As you are aware, NWIFC and its member tribes fought EPA’s 2019 rollback of Washington’s Human 
Health Criteria that EPA issued in 2016 because it did not reflect an adequate level of protection for 
tribal members consuming fish and shellfish.  In determining the level of protection for treaty 
resources and right holders, states and EPA should rely on fish consumption surveys, accounts of 
 
3 Minnesota v. Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians, 526 U.S. 172, 196 (1999); Antoine v. Washington, 420 U.S. 194, 199 (1975); 
Washington v. Washington State Commercial Passenger Fishing Vessel Ass’n, 443 U.S. 658, 690 (1979); McClanahan v. Arizona 
Tax Comm’n, 411 U.S. 164, 174 (1973) 

NWIFC Comments on Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, Proposed Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights  
March 6, 2023 
Page 4 
 
historic fish consumption rates through consultation with tribes, interviews with tribal elders and 
historians (with permission), and research about emerging threats to aquatic and aquatic-
dependent species. 
 
Proposed §131.9(b) provides: “In reviewing State water quality standards submissions under this 
section, EPA will initiate tribal consultation with the right holders, consistent with applicable EPA 
tribal consultation policies, in determining whether State water quality standards protect applicable 
tribal reserved rights in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section.” 
 
We support early and frequent consultation between EPA and tribes.  We also remind EPA that 
merely listening to tribal perspectives does not constitute adequate consultation.  EPA, as federal 
trustee, must also act to protect treaty resources. 
 
NWIFC also supports the requirement in §131.9 (c) that WQS must designate uses and establishes 
appropriate water quality criteria to protect those uses.  To be clear, the exercise of treaty rights 
constitutes an existing use; therefore, those rights must be fully protected, and no degradation of 
water quality is permitted. 
 
Minimum Requirements for Water Quality Standards Submissions 
Under §131.6, EPA proposes that where tribal reserved rights apply to WQS being submitted for 
review and approval, states must include: 1) Information about the scope, nature, and current and 
past use of the tribal reserved rights, as informed by the right holders; and 2) Data and methods 
used to develop the WQS.  Additionally, EPA is revising the triennial review process to include an 
evaluation of whether there are tribal reserved rights applicable to waters subject to the state's 
WQS and whether WQS need to be revised to protect those rights.  To ensure that tribes with 
reserved rights are engaged in the process of determining whether reserved rights apply, § 131.6 
would require that WQS submissions to EPA include information about tribal reserved rights “as 
informed by the right holders,” where applicable. 
 
The NWIFC generally support these provisions of the proposed rule.  We recommend that 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) is incorporated as required information in defining the 
reserved right.  EPA had demonstrated a willingness to utilize TEK in decision-making during the 
remediation of contaminated lands.4  
 
While EPA’s intent to encourage active engagement with the tribes by the states is well-meaning, 
we are concerned this provision leaves determination of the existence of treaty rights and the 
standards necessary for their protection to the thoroughness of a state’s consultation efforts with 
those holding the reserved rights.  There are numerous examples where states have failed to 
consult with tribes on actions harmful to treaty resources.  Tribes determine where their treaty 
rights are exercised and where treaty-reserved resources exist, not states.  As co-managers, tribes 
 
4 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Memorandum “Considering Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) During the Cleanup 
Process (1.3.2017); (https://www.epa.gov/tribal-lands/considering-traditional-ecological-knowledge-tek-during-a-cleanup-
process) 

NWIFC Comments on Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, Proposed Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights  
March 6, 2023 
Page 5 
 
determine where, how, and when treaty resources are sustained and harvested.  Tribe’s exercise 
their rights on their reservations and at all “usual and accustomed” places, which can cover an 
extensive geographic area, crossing multiple state and federal jurisdictions.   
 
Further, treaty right holders may want information about where treaty rights are exercised, or how 
treaty resources are used for cultural purposes, kept confidential.  Section 131.6(g) should allow for 
this information to be kept confidential at the right holder’s request.  As outlined in the proposed 
rule, EPA’s role in the determination of the applicability of treaty rights appears more like that of a 
facilitator for tribal and state engagement, and not that of a federal trustee.  We recommend that 
the proposed rule include a dispute resolution process which rights holders can request to engage 
directly with the EPA Administrator.  Should a dispute arise about whether treaty rights apply to a 
waterbody, or the level of protection needed to protect the right, EPA would be expected to consult 
with the tribes and disapprove any weakening of WQS where treaty rights are currently exercised or 
will be exercised in the future.   
 
Use Attainability Analysis and Tribal Reserved Rights 
EPA requested comments on whether and how states can revise designated uses, as provided by 40 
CFR 131.10 while also ensuring the protection of tribal reserved rights.  As noted above, the 
exercise of treaty rights must be considered an existing use, practiced since time immemorial, and 
certainly when the Clean Water Act was enacted.  Therefore, use attainability analysis (U.A.A.) is 
not appropriate for revising WQS in waters identified by treaty right holders as a place where treaty 
rights are, or will be, exercised.  Therefore, U.A.A. should be prohibited in these waters.  
 
Conclusion 
In closing, we appreciate EPA’s initiative to protect treaty rights through revision of federal WQS 
regulations.  The proposed rule will help address current and emerging threats to water quality and 
treaty-reserved resources.  We trust our comments will be useful as EPA finalizes the rule.  If you 
have any questions, please contact Greg Haller, Environmental Protection Policy Analyst, at 
ghaller@nwifc.org.   
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
Justin R. Parker 
Executive Director

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0231 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
1 
 
Tribal Treaty Right Effect Determination Process  
 
Version: July 27, 2020 
 
 
What is the purpose of this document?   
 
As part of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), Seattle District’s permit application review 
process, we notify Tribes of proposed activities occurring within waters of interest to federally 
recognized Tribes, and request Tribal notification of any concerns or comments regarding the 
proposed activity’s effects.  If a Tribe has concerns regarding the proposed Department of the Army 
(DA) regulated activity, we will encourage the applicant and Tribe to work together to resolve those 
concerns, to the extent both the applicant and Tribe are amenable to that approach.   
 
Should a Tribe have unresolved concerns that rise to the level where the Tribe objects to USACE 
authorization of the activity on the basis that it would violate a Tribe’s reserved treaty right, the 
Tribe notifies the Seattle District of the Tribe’s objection.  In making a permit decision, the USACE 
must ensure it does not authorize an activity that would result in a violation of a Tribal treaty right.  
 
This document provides general information about the review process of the Seattle District once a 
Tribe notifies the agency of an objection to authorize a proposed activity because the Tribe is 
concerned the proposed activity would impermissibly infringe a Tribe’s treaty right.  
 
What effect would a Tribal objection based on tribal treaty rights have on the Seattle District’s 
permit decision? 
 
When presented with such an objection from a Tribe, the Seattle District considers project-specific 
information to determine whether the proposed activity under the USACE’s regulatory jurisdiction 
would result in an impermissible abrogation of the treaty right.   The USACE both recognizes its 
obligation to uphold Tribal treaty rights and that the applicant is entitled to a timely decision 
regarding its permit application.  In conducting this effects determination, the USACE is neither a 
proponent nor opponent for a permit application. 33 C.F.R § 320.1(4).  
 
If the USACE was to make a determination and finding that DA authorization of the applicant’s 
proposed activity would impermissibly infringe on a reserved treaty right, the USACE would need 
substantial evidence from an objecting Tribe to rebut the presumption that approval of the DA 
permit would not be contrary to the public interest. The applicant is afforded an opportunity to 
review and respond to the Tribe’s submission, and to submit evidence. The USACE must examine 
the specific facts of the situation in the context of existing information, law, and policy to determine 
whether the proposed project would abrogate a treaty right. In doing this, the USACE does not 
conduct a balancing test. If information before the Agency demonstrates the specific proposed 
project before the Agency would obstruct, eliminate, or interfere with the objecting Tribe’s access to 
its Usual and Accustomed fishing grounds and stations to such an extent the Tribe’s reserved treaty 
fishing right will be impermissibly impaired, the USACE does not have the authority to issue a 
permit for the project in the absence of a specific statutory authorization.  See Northwest Sea Farms 
v. United State Army Corps of Engineers, 931 F. Supp. 1515 (W.D.Wash. 1996).  If, however, the 
USACE determines that DA authorization of the proposed activity would not abrogate a treaty right, 

2 
 
the Corps would continue the full evaluation of the permit application notwithstanding the objection 
from the tribe.  
 
 
What information might assist Seattle District in determining whether an activity would 
abrogate a treaty right? 
 
As the Tribe has unique access to relevant information regarding the scope of its interest that would 
potentially be affected by the proposed DA regulated activity and how the proposed project would 
physically obstruct access to tribal Usual and Accustomed (U&A) places, an objecting Tribe with 
treaty-reserved fishing rights bears the burden of raising, and, thereafter, presenting, information to 
the agency sufficient to sustain an objection to the issuance of a proposed permit. In the absence of a 
raised and sustained objection, the Corps will presume the granting of a permit would not abrogate a 
treaty right.  
 
 
The Seattle District must have sufficient evidence to evaluate whether the proposed activity’s 
interference with a treaty right is of the type that would abrogate the right.  Potentially relevant 
information regarding the scope of the tribe’s interest includes: the specific proposed project’s 
effect(s) on the Tribe’s reserved treaty right regarding: (1) the geographic right of access to the 
Tribe’s U&A fishing places, (2) degradation of fish runs and habitat, (3) other treaty issues, as 
applicable.   
 
This determination must evaluate the specific treaty right alleged to be at risk of impairment by the 
proposed project by the applicant.  First, a treaty right must be established in the project area.  The 
Seattle District is in interested in the Tribe’s historic, present, and proposed use of the project site, 
and will also look to specific treaties and adjudicated treaty rights determinations, if available, 
regarding the project location.  Second, the Seattle District is interested in understanding the nature 
of the proposed activity’s effect(s) on the Tribe’s treaty rights.  Third, the Seattle District will 
consider other information provided by the Tribe in order to evaluate the extent of potential 
impact(s) to the Tribe’s treaty right, and whether the identified impacts impermissibly infringe on 
the treaty right.  The USACE may also choose to seek out additional information from public 
sources or third parties regarding certain topics, such as fish conservation matters or applicable 
regulatory parameters.  The applicant may choose to present evidence to respond to submissions by 
the tribe, but is under no obligation to add to the record.  
 
 
Documentation to support this fact specific inquiry may include, but is not necessarily limited to: 
 
 Affidavits/declarations from Tribal members explaining, as applicable: 
1. How often, and, when, Tribal harvesting at the location in question has occurred; and if it 
is intended to occur in the future? 
2. Type of fishing/harvesting method(s) involved in fishing/harvesting from the site, e.g., dip 
net, reef net, drift net etc. 
3. How would Tribal access to fishing/harvesting sites be affected by the proposed project? 
What standoff distance(s) would the tribe need to maintain from the proposed project, and, 
why; as well as how many acres of fishing (for that species) with that specific fishing 
method would become inaccessible or impaired?  

3 
 
4. Information about the applicable conservation and/or management plans regarding the 
fishery in and around the project area. 
 Drawing/map showing location of the fishing activity in relation to the proposed permit activity.   
 Videos/photos of the fishing/harvesting activity at or around the project site. 
 
What are the next steps after this information is provided to the Seattle District? 
 
The information provided to the Seattle District will be shared with the permit applicant.  The permit 
applicant will be afforded the opportunity to respond to the materials provided by the Tribes in 
support of a treaty right.  If the permit applicant chooses to respond, the response will be shared with 
the Tribe asserting the treaty right.  The scope of the USACE’s inquiry into an allegation of a treaty 
rights abrogation on the basis that the proposed project presents a physical bar of access to tribal 
U&A places, is focused upon an evaluation of the relevant and material facts submitted into the 
administrative record by the parties.  The USACE may also choose to seek information from public 
sources and third parties, such as fish conservation programs or applicable regulatory 
parameters.The end goal of this process is that the Seattle District obtains information necessary to 
complete our fact-specific analysis, and renders a decision that complies with all legal requirements 
and standards.  
 
If there is not sufficient evidence available to the USACE to demonstrate that DA authorization 
of the proposed activity would result in an impermissible abrogation of the treaty right because of 
the extent it physically impairs or obstructs the Tribe’s access to it’s U&A grounds and stations,, the 
USACE will continue to process the permit application in accordance with the agency’s 
implementing regulations.    The USACE will then next determine if there are other aspects of the Tribe’s 
objection  to evaluate, and may seek out further information from both the Tribe and applicant in regards to 
other aspects of the effects of the proposed permit application on the Tribe’s treaty right. The USACE will 
not conclude its public interest review until it has resolved any Tribal objection that authorizing the 
applicant’s proposal would be an abrogation of a reserved treaty right. If, however, the Seattle 
District determines a Tribal objection to DA authorization of the proposed activity has been raised 
and substantiated with project-specific information, the Seattle District may not authorize the 
proposed activity, in the absence of specific statutory authorization.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0258 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
1 
 
 
 
EPA Region 10 Tribal Operations Committee (RTOC) 
P.O. Box 689  
Spokane, Washington 99210 
www.region10rtoc.net 
March 6, 2023 
 
Administrator Michael S. Regan  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
Submitted via https://www.regulations.gov/ 
 
RE: 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, Proposed Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
This letter is sent on behalf of the Tribal Caucus of the Region 10 Tribal Operations Committee’s 
(“RTOC”) on Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022) (“Proposed 
Rule”).  These comments are not sent on behalf of EPA Region 10 or any employees of EPA, but 
solely on behalf of the tribal government representatives of the RTOC.  
 
If enacted, the Proposed Rule will enhance the protection of treaty rights as it explicitly states 
that the water quality standards set by the state are dependent upon the reserved rights of Tribes. 
The Proposed Rule has the additional benefit of furthering the EPA’s obligation to protect the 
rights reserved by Tribes. Here, EPA is prioritizing their fiduciary duty to tribes by setting water 
quality standards that are high enough to protect tribal treaty rights.  
 
While supporting the Proposed Rule, the RTOC offers the following comments: 
 
1. Definition of Tribal Reserved Rights Should be Expanded to Include Subsistence 
Rights in Alaska. 
 
The RTOC requests that the Proposed Rule specifically address subsistence rights of Alaska 
Natives. 
 

2 
 
In Proposed Rule § 131.3, EPA defines “tribal reserved rights” as “any rights to aquatic and/or 
aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through 
treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of Federal law.” The RTOC request that this 
language be expanded to include subsistence rights established by federal law and exercised by 
Alaska Native. 
 
The Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (“ANILCA”) explicitly protects Native 
Alaskans’ subsistence uses “mandating a hunting and fishing preference for rural residents in 
Alaska,” 16 U.S.C. § 3101(c), and describing subsistence as “essential for rural Alaskans-- 
specifically Alaska Natives--to maintain physical, economic, traditional, and cultural existence.”   
16 U.S.C. § 3111(1). 
 
The history of ANILCA enforcement  illustrates the federal government's strong commitment to 
protecting native subsistence. Originally, ANILCA offered Alaska the option of managing 
subsistence on federal public lands if the State would adopt a law granting “rural” users, 
primarily Alaska natives, subsistence priority. When Alaska refused, declaring the preference for 
rural residents impermissible under the Alaskan constitution, the federal government intervened 
and took back management authority over fish and wildlife on federal lands. By resuming 
management of these lands, the federal government ensured that rural users, particularly Alaskan 
native communities, would continue to have subsistence preference. 
 
Other federal laws, such as the Marine Mammal Protection Act (“MMPA”), recognize and 
protect subsistence rights of Alaska Natives.  In enacting the MMPA, Congress put in place a 
dominant use regime, granting a protected status and heightened protections to the subsistence 
use of marine mammals by Alaska Natives.  16 U.S.C. §1371(b) (stating that the “provisions of 
this chapter shall not apply with respect to the taking of any marine mammal by any Indian, 
Aleut or Eskimo, who resides in Alaska and who dwells on the coast of the North Pacific Ocean 
or the Arctic Ocean ....”); Katelnikoff v. United States Dep't of Interior, 657 F. Supp. 659, 666 
(D. Alaska 1986) (noting that Congress's concern in enacting the Native exemption was “the 
preservation of traditional aspects of native culture and lifestyle”); 118 Cong. Rec. 25,258 (1972) 
(statement of Sen. Stevens) (“If this exception were not included, Alaskan Natives would lose 
their traditional way of life, the way they have lived for centuries....”). 
 
EPA could alleviate confusion and ambiguity moving forward by explicitly incorporating these 
subsistence rights into the Proposed Rule. 
 
2. The Proposed Rule should Provide Mandatory Requirements for States and EPA to 
Consult with and Provide a Response to Materials Provided by Tribes. 
 
RTOC recommends EPA adopt a process that requires states to contact all Tribes with reserved 
rights within their borders, meet with them separately from the general public hearing provided 
in § 131.20, and take their input into account when reviewing WQS and provide the Tribe and 
EPA with a written response to any input provided. In addition, EPA should require states to 
notify Tribes affected and EPA if the state disagrees with the Tribe’s claim to a reserved right in 
a particular resource.  These additions to the regulation should be a mandatory duty of the state 
and stringently enforced by EPA.  

3 
 
 
 
Moreover, the Proposed Rule should provide for specific requirements for EPA to consult with 
Tribes prior to taking any action on a state proposal that may impact reserved rights. The RTOC 
recommends that Proposed Rule § 131.9(b) be amended to include dispute resolution procedures 
when Tribes disagree with EPA conclusions of whether state water quality standards are 
protective of the reserved rights, including the right to elevate the matter directly to the EPA 
Administrator. 
 
3. Designation of Beneficial Uses must be tied to Reserved Rights. 
 
The RTOC supports the requirement in Proposed Rule § 131.9(c) that WQS must designate uses 
and establish appropriate water quality criteria to protect those uses, pursuant to § 131.11.  
RTOC supports a requirement that states, after consultation with tribes, designate water as 
“Reserved Rights Protection” as a beneficial use of water, with water quality criteria for that use. 
 
We also note some waters may not include designated beneficial uses that cover reserved 
resources like salmon rearing, spawning, or migration, but may play a critical role in supporting 
the habitat of treaty resources and the sustainable exercise of treaty rights by tribal members 
downstream. Many RTOC member Tribes exercise their rights in interconnected waters and 
ecosystems that depend on healthy water quality from upstream sources.  EPA should clarify that 
water quality standards be developed to protect reserved resources and rights apply both within 
the location of place-based rights, as well as in adjacent and connected waters, as determined by 
Tribes.  
 
4. Protection of Unsuppressed Use. 
 
Proposed Rule § 131.9(a) would require that, “to the extent supported by available data and 
information, to protect applicable tribal reserved rights WQS must be established to protect: 1) 
The exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic 
or aquatic-dependent resource; and 2) The health of the right holders to at least the same risk 
level as provided to the general population of the State.” The RTOC agrees that tribal reserved 
rights must be protected at levels unsuppressed by water quality or the availability of the 
resource.  
 
Nearly all tribal reserved resources exist today at suppressed levels due to degraded habitat, 
including poor water quality. EPA suggests that in determining the level of protection required, 
states should balance heritage use of a resource with what is currently reasonably achievable for 
a particular waterbody. RTOC disagrees with this approach. This contradicts EPA’s objective to 
protect unsuppressed use. This also does not address EPA’s trust obligation to protect these 
reserved rights.    
 
The RTOC recommends that the language be altered to require protection of unsuppressed rates 
unless agreement is otherwise reached with applicable Tribes. 
 
 

4 
 
5. Protecting Tribal Fish Consumption Rates. 
The RTOC supports the protection of tribal reserved rights so that the health of tribal members 
will not be subject to any greater risk level than the general population, as provided in Proposed 
Rule § 131.9(a)(2). However, RTOC suggests EPA require states to utilize the more frequently 
used 10-6 risk level even if the state uses the less stringent 10-5 risk level for the general population.   
In Region 10, risk levels have been used to offset benefits of increased fish consumption rates.   
Given the amount of fish consumption that occurs by Tribes across the Region, a 10-6 risk level 
should be used as a default unless a state can provide evidence that it is not appropriate. 
 
6. Protection of Culturally Sensitive Information.  
 
The Proposed Rule encourages Tribes to provide information and data to the state for 
determining where and how the reserved rights apply, “as informed by the right holder.” The 
RTOC recommends that the request for culturally sensitive information must occur under strict 
confidential procedures. Proposed Rule § 131.6 (g) should provide that Tribes may request 
certain information about tribal reserved rights to be kept confidential, in which the state and 
EPA must honor that request. For example, a Tribe may want to keep the location of a resource 
confidential, as well as precisely how it is used if for a traditional cultural purpose. 
 
In addition to these comments, the RTOC specifically incorporates by reference the comments 
submitted by the National Tribal Water Council and the Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission. 
 
The RTOC looks forward to working with the EPA in a joint effort to improve and secure 
protection of treaty-reserved rights in federal water quality standards. The Proposed Rule the 
potential to positively and meaningfully impact Region 10 Tribes’ rights and their associated 
resources.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0186 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
February 28, 2023
Comment in Response to Proposed Rule on Water
Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791
As a college student majoring in Human Ecology with a concentration in environmental law and
policy, who has also taken classes surrounding Indigenous peoples and associated law, I offer the
following comments on the Proposed Rule on Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to
Protect Tribal Reserved Rights.
Understanding that tribes have the reserved right to aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources, I agree
with the EPA’s view that these reserved rights “could be impaired by water quality levels that limit
right holders’ ability to utilize their rights” (5). I am in support and appreciation of this proposed rule,
in not only honoring its trust obligation to tribes but, in its attempt to create predictability in how the
EPA will review water quality standards.
Because I agree with the legislative protections this proposed rule outlines, my comments will focus
on addressing the various EPA commenting requests that the proposed rule asks throughout.
1.
EPA requests comment on whether there are additional types of tribal reserved rights
that it should consider. § (IV)(C)(1)
The current proposed rule considers tribal reserved rights related to rights to fish, gather aquatic
plants, and hunt for aquatic-dependent animals. Within the proposed rule the EPA “recognizes that
tribal reserved rights to use and access natural and cultural resources are an intrinsic part of tribal life
and are of deep cultural, economic, and subsistence importance to tribes.” In terms of cultural and
subsistence needs, the rule could explicitly codify the right to grow/farm/harvest plants on/in the
water. For example, wild rice (manoonmin), grows along bodies of water, and is a staple of many
tribal diets.1 In addition to its sustenance, it strengthens community bonds and is “an essential
spiritual, economic, and material resource.”2 Ecologically, “wild rice provides important habitat for
waterfowl, fish and many other wildlife species.”3 Enshrining this right through this the proposed
rule would protect this right for all tribes instead of only ones that have the treaty-protected right to
harvest wild rice and reduce the burden on states to explicitly establish this right.
3 Kevin Abourezk, “Wild Rice Harvest.” The Nature Conservancy. August 27, 2021.
https://www.nature.org/en-us/magazine/magazine-articles/ojibwe-wild-rice-harvest/#:~:text=The%20yearly%20harv
est%20is%20not.
2 “Wild Rice: A Sacred Food,” The Pluralism Project, https://pluralism.org/wild-rice-a-sacred-food.
1 Heide Brandes, “Like Gold to Us’: Native American Nations Struggle to Protect Wild Rice.” The Magazine of the
Sierra Club, August 26, 2019,
https://www.sierraclub.org/sierra/gold-us-native-american-nations-struggle-protect-wild-rice#:~:text=The%20wild%
20rice%2C%20called%20manoomin,lakes%20throughout%20the%20North%20Woods.

Not explicitly encoding the right to grow/farm/harvest plants on/in the water in the rule runs the risk
of a lack of protection and active harm to tribes if they are not able to grow these crops. Because
wildlife species such as waterfowl and fish are already threatened and stressed by the effects of
climate change: warming waters, habitat destruction, etc., enshrining the ability to grow these crops
also affords these wildlife species and ecosystems as a whole, protection, and stability.
2.
EPA requests comment on the types of historic information that states and EPA should
consider. § (IV)(C)(2)(i)
The EPA should consider other historic information such as traditional ecological knowledge4 and
oral history. Oral history provides a wealth of important knowledge surrounding historical (at the
time the tribal right was established if this metric does not already exist) versus current water quality
standards, types of aquatic and aquatic-dependent species, markers of change, consumptive rates, and
uses of these species. This information is essential in conservation and restoration efforts as tribes
have been effectively managing water resources and biodiversity for centuries. Scientists around the
world are turning to traditional ecological knowledge and oral histories to tackle various ecological
issues from protecting fish stocks and wildlife species to controlling wildfires.5
3.
EPA requests comment on whether there are other instances where WQS may need to
be adjusted to protect tribal reserved rights consistent with this proposed rulemaking. §
(IV)(C)(2)(iv)(2)
States implementing this rule may benefit from clarity in the quality of water necessary to protect
tribal reserved rights pursuant to Section 303(c)(2)(A) of the Clean Water Act which provides that
“[water quality] standards shall be such as to protect the public health or welfare, enhance the
quality of water and serve the purposes of this chapter. Such standards shall be established
taking into consideration their use and value for public water supplies, propagation of fish
and wildlife, recreational purposes, and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and also
taking into consideration their use and value for navigation.”
Proposed section (IV)(C)(2)(i), places the burden on the state to develop a water quality standard that
protects tribal reserved rights with help from the EPA in gathering information and facilitating
dialogue between states and right holders.
Although this proposed rule applies to waters on a case-by-case basis, I believe that a federal baseline
water quality standard that protects the reserved rights of the tribe is in line with the proposed rule’s
goal to create predictability in how the EPA will review water quality standards. This baseline
standard would help protect tribal reserved rights to ensure that no state maintains a quality below the
5 Jim Robbins, “Native Knowledge: What Ecologists Are Learning from Indigenous People,” Yale Environment
360, April 26, 2018,
https://e360.yale.edu/features/native-knowledge-what-ecologists-are-learning-from-indigenous-people.
4 “Traditional Ecological Knowledge Fact Sheet.” U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Feb. 2011,
https://www.fws.gov/media/traditional-ecological-knowledge-fact-sheet#:~:text=Traditional%20Ecological%20Kno
wledge%2C%20also%20called,direct%20contact%20with%20the%20environment.

bare minimum needed as well as will protect tribal reserved rights in the transition period in which
this rule is implemented and states work to collect data to develop their new water quality standards.
This baseline standard would also provide protection and clarity for many states in which tribal
reserved rights run through multiple state boundaries with different regulations and information on
the water quality standard that would protect tribal reserved rights. This is especially important to
consider as many tribes rely on anadromous fish species such as salmon and steelhead species6 who
may carry pollutants with them as they travel between water sources.
4.
EPA requests comment on whether there are other factors it should consider when
making decisions under these circumstances. (Where information is conflicting, there
are gaps in information, and/or a difference of opinion exists between the state and one
or more tribes about the level of water quality necessary to protect a reserved right) §
(IV)(C)(2)(iv)(2)
In addition to relying on the best available information and science that the EPA promises to do, the
EPA should consider using the historical standard of water quality that tribes relied on as a metric
during conflicting water quality standards. In the context of reserved rights, tribes are well aware of
their water needs and how they were able to use water when their sources were at a higher historical
water quality level. These water needs may not just be related to physical health in terms of
sustenance but also spiritual well-being. For example, the inability to fish for some tribes does not
just result in a loss of food which results in hunger but also severs ties to ancestors that tribes
maintain who also fished for sustenance. As a result, the EPA should defer to the tribes over states
when there are conflicts in terms of stakeholder conclusions and opinions on the level of water
quality necessary to protect a reserved right. In addition to tribal consultation, the EPA can consider
turning to oral histories and testimony when they consider the best available information.
5.
EPA requests comment on whether and how states can revise designated uses, as
provided for by 40 CFR 131.10, while also ensuring the protection of tribal reserved
rights per proposed 40 CFR 131.9. § (IV)(C)(2)(iv)(4)
The EPA should consider including specifics on whether or how a state can revise designated uses
and still protect tribal reserved rights in the proposed subpart 131.9 of the federal water quality
standard7 (40 CFR 131.9). I believe that explicitly including these specifics only strengthens tribal
protection by reducing the risk of this issue going up for debate when a lack of clarity on the ability
of states to make those revisions exists. This action would make the existence of the option to revise
designated uses while still protecting tribal reserved rights clearer and accessible to states. Further,
this clarification would save costs in administrative resources as states could spend less time figuring
out how to revise designated uses and still protect tribal reserved rights since it would be outlined in
40 CFR 131.9.
7 40 CFR § 131
6 “Anadromous Fish,” National Parks Service,
https://www.nps.gov/olym/learn/nature/anadromous-fish.htm#:~:text=Overview%3A.

6.
EPA requests comment on whether EPA should specify in 40 CFR 131.9 how other
WQS provisions, such as general policies under 40 CFR 131.13, WQS variances under
40 CFR 131.14, and permit compliance schedules under 40 CFR 131.15, should be used
to ensure protection of tribal reserved rights. § (IV)(F)
For similar reasons stated above, the EPA should consider including specifics on whether or how a
state can adopt a WQS variance and still protect tribal reserved rights in the proposed subpart 131.9
of the federal water quality standard7 (40 CFR 131.9). In addition, they should consider monitoring
for other chemicals that are outside of federal listing8 that are likely to contaminate these water
sources from point source pollutants as they come from factories and emitters that are placed near the
water sources or use the water sources for discharge.
7.
EPA requests comment on this conclusion. (While tribal right holders would not be
direct respondents, EPA acknowledges that the proposed regulation would require that
state submissions be informed by the right holders. EPA believes this would not lead to
increased burden on right holders because the (79) proposed rule would not require
additional coordination beyond that which already occurs during WQS public
participation processes and EPA's consultations with tribal governments)
§ (VI)(B)
Although I agree with the idea that having state submissions be informed by right holders may not
necessarily require additional coordination or increase the burden on right holders, I believe that
tribal right holders should have the option to be direct respondents.  Tribes have their own health
advisories and departments that often work with states. I believe that the option for tribes to be direct
respondents creates the opportunity for tribes to increase their trust and faith in produced rules as
they know that the preliminary information and submissions are coming directly from tribal health
advisories that they may be more likely to trust rather than being funneled from tribal advisories to
the state to the EPA. The state processing and conveying this information increases the likelihood of
miscommunication.
Thank you for your thoughtful effort to address this longstanding issue. I appreciate your requests for
feedback on specific questions and the opportunity to comment on the proposed rule.
Sincerely,
Aishwarya Devarajan
adevarajan24@coa.edu
8 40 CFR § 401.15 - Toxic pollutants

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0285 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
. . . . . . . . . . . 
 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   
      
 
 Federal Water Quality Coalition 
March 6, 2023  
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Water Docket (Mail Code 28221T) 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 N. Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
 
Re: FWQC Comments on EPA’s Proposed Rule, Water Quality 
Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 
EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791  
Dear Sir or Madam: 
The Federal Water Quality Coalition (FWQC or the Coalition) appreciates the 
opportunity to file these comments on EPA’s proposed rule, Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (the “Proposal”). The Proposal was 
published in the Federal Register on December 5, 2022 (87 Fed. Reg. 74361), with a 
comment deadline of March 6, 2023.    
 
I. 
The FWQC’s Interest 
 
The FWQC is a group of industrial companies, municipal entities, agricultural parties, 
and trade associations that are directly affected, or which have members that are directly 
affected, by regulatory decisions made by EPA and States under the Federal Clean Water Act 
(CWA).  FWQC membership includes entities in the aluminum, agricultural, automobile, 
chemicals, coke and coal chemicals, electric utility, home building, iron and steel, mining, 
municipal, paper, petroleum, pharmaceutical, rubber, and other sectors.  FWQC members, for 
purposes of these comments, include: The Aluminum Association; American Chemistry 
Council; American Coke and Coal Chemicals Institute; American Forest & Paper 
Association; American Iron and Steel Institute; American Petroleum Institute; Association of 
Idaho Cities; Auto Industry Water Quality Coalition; Cargill, Incorporated; China Clay 
Producers Association; City of Pueblo (CO); City of Superior (WI); City of Tempe (AZ); 
Corn Refiners Association; Eli Lilly and Company; Freeport McMoRan Inc.; Hecla Mining 
Company; Mid America CropLife Association; National Association of Home Builders; 
National Oilseed Processors Association; Portland Cement Association; Shell; Treated Wood 
Council; U.S. Tire Manufacturers Association; Utility Water Act Group; and Western States 
Petroleum Association. 
 
Fredric P. Andes, Coordinator 
Barnes & Thornburg LLP 
One North Wacker Drive 
Suite 4400 
Chicago, IL 60606 
(312) 214-8310 

EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Office of Water Docket 
March 6, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 
FWQC member entities or their members own and operate facilities located 
throughout the country.  Those facilities operate pursuant to NPDES permits that impose 
control requirements based on water quality standards.  The Proposal provides new 
requirements that must be followed by States in adopting water quality standards. The 
FWQC, therefore, has a direct interest in the Proposal.  
 
II. 
FWQC CONCERNS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
The FWQC supports the needs and concerns of Tribes and their members for clean 
water.  Those needs and concerns must be protected in ways that are consistent with the 
procedures and requirements established by applicable laws, including the Clean Water Act.  
Any new requirements imposed in this area must also be based on sound science and must be 
capable of being implemented in effective, non-arbitrary ways.  Unfortunately, EPA’s 
Proposal does not meet those tests.  The new proposed requirements are not authorized by the 
Clean Water Act.  They also rest on unproven scientific rationales, and we believe that they 
would be difficult to implement as States set water quality standards.  The FWQC has raised 
these concerns before, when EPA has considered taking other actions in this area, and we 
raise these concerns again in these comments as to the specific provisions of the Proposal.  
We urge EPA to withdraw the Proposal, and to instead begin a dialogue with the Tribes and 
other stakeholders, to determine the best and most effective ways to protect Tribal rights 
within the structure of EPA’s Clean Water Act programs. 
 
A. 
Relevant Sources of Federal Law 
 
As an initial matter, the FWQC has concerns regarding the sources of Federal law on 
which EPA bases its Proposal.  EPA cites Tribal treaties, but also mentions several other 
potential sources.  But EPA fails to recognize that there are fundamental differences, legally, 
between Tribal treaties and the other “sources of Federal law” that are mentioned.  And those 
other “sources” do not provide a clear legal basis for imposing new requirements that go 
beyond what has been adopted – and what is authorized – under the Clean Water Act.  For 
instance, EPA refers to executive orders.  But an executive order issued by the President 
cannot override a statute, such as the CWA.  EPA also refers to “statutes.”  But the Supreme 
Court has stated clearly, in National Association of Home Builders v. Defenders of Wildlife, 
551 U.S. 644 (2007), that another statute (even one as important as the Endangered Species 
Act) cannot change the requirements set forth in the CWA.  Beyond executive orders and 
statutes, EPA refers generally to “other sources of Federal law,” but we have no idea what 
that means.  If EPA decides, despite the concerns that we lay out in these comments, to 
continue work on a proposal to protect Tribal rights, it should delete all references to these 
“sources” of Federal law.  The only issue that EPA should be considering is as to rights 
provided in Tribal treaties.  But even those treaties, we believe, do not provide a clear legal 
basis for the Proposal, as we explain next. 

EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Office of Water Docket 
March 6, 2023 
Page 3 
 
 
B. 
Effect of Tribal Treaties 
 
As to Tribal treaties, it is important to consider the background as to how EPA has 
dealt with this issue over time.  The CWA was enacted over 50 years ago, and obviously, the 
treaties were created over 100 years ago.  But at no point, from the time that the CWA 
became law until 2015, did EPA voice the view that the treaties could modify or overrule the 
CWA.  In fact, EPA has taken precisely the opposite position in court, stating in briefs that 
the treaties do not affect its authority under the CWA or impose any additional obligations.  
In that case, EPA argued that its compliance with the CWA and its regulations satisfied any 
Federal trust responsibility owed to the Spokane Indian Tribe. Sierra Club v. McLerran, Case 
No. 2:11-cv-01759-BJR Docket No. 91 at 40-43 (January 29, 2014).  EPA explained as 
follows:  
 
There is a “distinctive obligation of trust incumbent upon the Government 
in its dealings with [Indian tribes].” Gros Ventre Tribe v. United States, 
469 F.3d 801, 810 (9th Cir. 2006) (quoting United States v. Mitchell, 463 
U.S. 206, 225 (1983)).  However, “[w]ithout an unambiguous provision by 
Congress that clearly outlines a federal trust responsibility, courts must 
appreciate that whatever fiduciary obligation otherwise exists, it is a 
limited one only.” Shoshone-Bannock Tribes v. Reno, 56 F.3d 1476, 1482 
(D.C. Cir. 1995). While that general trust relationship allows the federal 
government to consider and act in the tribes’ interests in taking 
discretionary actions, it does not impose a duty on the federal government 
to take action beyond complying with generally applicable statutes and 
regulations. Jicarilla, 131 S. Ct. at 2325. Accordingly, in the absence of a 
specific duty that has been placed on the government with respect to the 
Tribe, the United States’ general trust responsibility “is discharged by the 
agency’s compliance with general regulations and statutes not specifically 
aimed at protecting Indian tribes.” Morongo Band of Mission Indians v. 
F.A.A., 161 F.3d 569, 574 (9th Cir. 1998); Okanogan Highlands Alliance 
v. Williams, 236 F.3d 468, 479 (9th Cir. 2000) (Bureau of Land 
Management’s approval of gold mine satisfied trust obligations by the 
agency’s compliance with NEPA); Gros Ventre, 469 F.3d at 814. 
 
In that case, the judge ruled in favor of EPA on the trust responsibility issue, agreeing that 
EPA had discharged its trust duty by complying with the CWA.  Sierra Club v. McLerran, 45 
ELR 20052, Case No. 2:11-cv-01759-BJR Docket No. 120 at 23 (March 16, 2015).  In the 
Proposal, EPA fails to mention its prior position, and provides no explanation for its change 
in position.  While agencies are entitled to reconsider their positions, they cannot do so 
without convincing explanations of the reasons for the change, and EPA has failed to comply 
with that obligation here. 
 
It is also important to consider EPA’s legal basis for the Proposal, 
based on Tribal treaties, in the context of recent Supreme Court rulings.  In 

EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Office of Water Docket 
March 6, 2023 
Page 4 
 
 
the case of West Virginia v. EPA (U.S. Case No. 20-1530, June 30, 2022), the Court gave 
increased force to the “major question” doctrine.  Under that doctrine, major changes to 
existing statutory programs should not be undertaken without clear Congressional 
authorization.  In this case, no such authorization has occurred.  At no point since the CWA 
was enacted, in 1972, has Congress spoken to the issue of how Tribal treaties interact with 
the CWA.  And, as stated above, EPA’s position for most of that time has been that the 
treaties do not modify EPA’s or States’ obligations under the CWA.  For EPA now, without 
Congress speaking to the issue at all, to announce that treaties overrule the CWA violates the 
“major question” doctrine.  Therefore, the Proposal should not be finalized. 
 
C. 
Definition of Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
Even if EPA does need to find a way to incorporate Tribal treaty rights into its CWA 
programs, the definition of those rights in the Proposal is far broader than the rights actually 
referred to in those treaties.  For instance, the Proposal refers to “aquatic-dependent animals.”  
But the treaties generally refer to fishing rights.  Protection of bears and other animals that 
eat fish goes well beyond the human-focused fishing rights incorporated in the treaties.  EPA 
also refers to protecting aquatic plants – but again, this does not relate to the fishing rights in 
the treaties.  These other issues have no place in any regulatory proposal that is based on 
protection of treaty-based fishing rights. 
 
A more fundamental problem in the Proposal is how EPA defines protected rights.  
The Agency assumes that the right to fish, as provided in the treaties, means that States must 
ensure that all waters that are covered by treaties must have water quality that meets water 
quality standards that are based on EPA policies as to how human health standards should be 
set to ensure safe fish consumption.  This new Agency position imports EPA policies – some 
of which are only in guidance documents, not regulations, and all of which have only been 
set in the last two decades – into Tribal treaties that were established over 100 years ago.  
There is simply no legal basis for that position. 
 
D. 
Use of “Unsuppressed” Fish Consumption Rates 
 
Beyond the general legal concerns laid out above, the FWQC is also concerned about 
the specific requirements set forth in the Proposal.  One of those mandates is that State water 
quality standards (WQS) must reflect fish consumption rates that are not “suppressed” by 
water quality or availability of fish.  We see no basis for that mandate in the CWA.1  States 
have been issuing WQS for many years, and EPA has never required that before.  If using 
“unsuppressed” rates is now a CWA mandate, does that mean that it must be reflected in all 
                                                 
1 Beyond the lack of legal basis for importing this requirement into the 
CWA, we also see no definition of “suppressed” or “unsuppressed” in the 
Proposal.  The lack of definition on a critical regulatory requirement 
creates a significant risk of arbitrary decisions, particularly when 
connected to terms that are inherently so subjective. 

EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Office of Water Docket 
March 6, 2023 
Page 5 
 
 
State WQS?  If EPA is requiring this where there is a treaty, but not otherwise, then it needs 
to provide some justification for that position, which is absent from the Proposal. 
 
It is also unclear how using “unsuppressed” rates squares with the CWA focus on 
future, attainable uses.  Society has changed in many ways since the treaties were signed; 
does the State have to figure out all of the factors that have affected fish consumption over 
the years, positively and negatively, and then determine which of those will change going 
forward and which will not, in order to isolate exactly how consumption rates would change 
if the levels of various pollutants were lower?  There is no basis for importing that type of 
analysis into the CWA as a requirement on States issuing WQS.  Further, in the Proposal, 
EPA states that WQS have to balance heritage use with what is reasonably achievable for a 
waterbody.  That is a fundamental change in the CWA requirements.2  Is EPA saying that a 
WQS must be based, at least sometimes, on a heritage use, even if that use is not reasonably 
achievable?  That would be directly contrary to the CWA language on attainable uses. 
 
The Proposal also reflects a major change in the type of information that States use in 
setting WQS.  Over the last 50 years, States have issued WQS – and EPA has approved them 
– based on actual, documented fish consumption rates.  The proposal would change that 
system entirely, requiring States to rely on subjective information, including people’s 
statements as to what prior generations may have consumed and unsupported assumptions as 
to how much fish people might consume in the future if various water quality and other 
conditions are changed (some of which cannot practically be changed).  The potential for 
arbitrary and capricious decisions is very high 
 
Beyond those general concerns, there are a number of specific issues in use of 
“unsuppressed” fish consumption rates (which we have raised before, with respect to past 
EPA guidance), which include the following: 
 
o EPA does not account for other factors, beyond fish contamination, that may 
have affected the “heritage” consumption level; 
o The proposal ignores changes in social customs, social makeup and dietary 
preferences that are independent of potential contamination in fish; 
o EPA seems to treat regulations that protect fish populations from overfishing 
as a form of “suppression;” 
o EPA assumes that people’s tastes and preferences, as well as economic and 
social conditions, are constant over time, which is obviously not the case; and 
o EPA ignores factors other than fish contamination that could affect the 
availability of fish, even though fish populations are constantly changing, due 
to a variety of ecological and non-ecological factors. 
 
                                                 
2 This change also raises the risk of arbitrary decisions, since the term 
“reasonably achievable” has not been defined in the Proposal, and is not a 
regulatory term that is used elsewhere in the CWA or associated rules. 

EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Office of Water Docket 
March 6, 2023 
Page 6 
 
 
For all of the reasons set forth above, EPA’s requirement for States to use “unsuppressed” 
fish consumption rates is flawed – legally, policywise, and technically – and should be 
withdrawn. 
 
E. 
Risk Levels for Tribal Members and the General Population 
 
Another mandate in the Proposal is that Tribal members with reserved rights must 
have their health protected to “at least the same risk level as provided to the general 
population of the State.”  This requirement is actually impossible to meet.  As EPA 
recognizes, the Tribal group will likely have a fish consumption rate that is higher than the 
general population.  Indeed, this is part of the reason that EPA wants to provide the Tribal 
group with a greater level of protection.  But if this group eats more fish than the general 
population, it will ALWAYS have a greater risk from eating contaminated fish than the 
general population would, by definition. Therefore, the EPA requirement cannot possibly be 
met.3 
 
The legal basis for the EPA requirement is also unclear.  EPA recognizes that as to 
other subpopulations with high fish consumption rates, such as subsistence fisherpeople, their 
risk will necessarily be higher than the risk for other people who eat less fish, and EPA 
policy allows that to be the case.  But as to Tribal members, EPA refuses to allow that, due to 
“their unique status as rights holders.”  But that simple declaration carries no legal analysis as 
to why tribal fishing rights under treaties compel a new requirement under the CWA (not 
recognized until now) that the risk for Tribal members must be exactly the same as the risk to 
the general population (which, as noted above, is not possible anyway). 
 
EPA provides no reason why this new “equal risk” requirement is necessary.  As EPA 
concedes, the current WQS regulations can be used by States to adopt (and have EPA 
                                                 
3 It is possible that EPA meant to require that protection levels for Tribal 
members with reserved rights should be set to at least the same risk level 
as previously provided to the general population of the State—generally, 
10-5 or 10-6. We see no legal basis for imposing such a requirement.  In 
addition, this change would necessarily shift the risk targets for the 
general population to higher, overly stringent levels that are not justified.  
EPA, in its own current methodology for developing human health WQS, 
recognizes that these more-stringent risk levels are not necessary to 
protect human health.  Changing these risk levels could also limit the 
ability for States to use modern risk assessment approaches, such as 
probabilistic risk assessment (PRA). PRA can be used to connect the 
general population and the more-vulnerable or high-consuming sub-
populations to tiered risk targets in a granular, transparent, and highly 
data-driven manner.  
 

EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Office of Water Docket 
March 6, 2023 
Page 7 
 
 
approve) more stringent site-specific WQS when it is necessary to attain designated uses.  
This has been done many times, and there is no need to impose new requirements.  
 
F. 
Other Concerns with EPA Proposal 
 
1. 
Availability of Tools to Address Unattainable Uses 
 
The FWQC has several other concerns with the Proposal that also need to be 
addressed.  One of those concerns relates to the interaction between Tribal rights and the 
basic CWA system for issuing – and modifying – designated uses.  EPA is asking for 
comment on how States can revise designated uses while also protecting Tribal reserved 
rights.  States should have flexibility in how they address designated uses, consistent with the 
clear allocation of WQS–setting responsibility to States in the CWA.  As an example, EPA 
should make it clear that protecting Tribal reserved rights cannot and should not restrict the 
availability of Use Attainability Analyses (UAAs) and variances under State programs.  The 
focus of the CWA is on protecting designated uses that are attainable.  That is why EPA has 
consistently, over the course of implementing the CWA, made it clear that UAAs and 
variances are acceptable ways to address situations where WQS are not attainable, whether in 
the short term (with variances) or in the long term (with UAAs).  Any action by EPA to 
eliminate or restrict use of those tools, on the basis of Tribal reserved rights, would be in 
conflict with the clear structure of the CWA. 
 
2. 
Consultation with All Stakeholders 
 
Several other issues with the Proposal relate to the process and analyses that EPA 
must conduct – both in issuing any rules in this area, and in implementing those new 
requirements.  For instance, EPA, in the Proposal, requires consultation with Tribes by both 
EPA and States in the adoption and approval of WQS.  Of course, consultation with the 
Tribes is important, but EPA should add that there should also be opportunities for other 
stakeholders, including the regulated community, to participate. 
 
3. 
Use of Antidegradation Policy 
 
The Proposal specifies several ways in which a State could revise their WQS to 
comply with the new Federal requirements.  One of those alternatives is for the State to use 
its antidegradation policy to protect Tribal reserved rights.  Within that antidegradation 
alternative, EPA provides two options: to assign a water body as an Outstanding National 
Resource Water (ORNW) or to amend the antidegradation policy to specify that any 
lowering of water quality in a high-quality water must continue to protect applicable reserved 
rights.  The FWQC has strong concerns with the ONRW option.  While EPA does not 
specify the full consequences of ONRW designation in the Proposal, Agency policies on 
antidegradation provide that once a waterbody is designated as an ONRW, no new or 
increased discharges are allowed to that waterbody (with very limited 
exceptions), even if they have no significant adverse impact on water 

EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Office of Water Docket 
March 6, 2023 
Page 8 
 
 
quality.  This is an extremely onerous restriction, which should only be imposed for a very 
limited set of waterbodies where development of the watershed should be prohibited entirely.  
ONRW designation should not be used for situations where application of existing 
antidegradation requirements for high-quality waters will be fully protective. 
 
4. 
EPA Analysis of Compliance Costs 
 
We also have concerns with how EPA has analyzed the costs of complying with the 
new requirements in the Proposal.  EPA has estimated that the Proposal will cost States only 
$5 million to implement.  Given the breadth of the new requirements, and the analysis that 
will be required each time that a State reviews and considers revisions to its WQS, we 
believe that figure is greatly understated. 
 
EPA refuses to estimate the costs to regulated entities that will result from the new 
requirements, on the basis that it would be too difficult to come up with an estimate at this 
time.  EPA cannot shirk its responsibility to consider compliance costs by simply stating that 
it would be too hard to do.  There is no question that the proposal would result in higher 
compliance costs for regulated dischargers.  It would clearly require States to set lower WQS 
– which would generally cost more to comply with, if they can be met at all.  EPA can 
certainly develop some hypothetical examples, using conservative risk levels and assumed 
higher fish consumption rates, and then estimate the change in compliance costs that would 
result for various kinds of facilities.  This information is critical, both for EPA to consider 
and for stakeholders to be able to comment on, before EPA issues a final regulation. 
 
5. 
Implementation Challenges for New Requirements 
 
In considering any changes to its regulations governing WQS, EPA needs to keep in 
mind that those standards need to be objective and scientifically defensible.  They must be 
based on equations that are transparent and lead to repeatable outcomes, so  permit holders 
and other stakeholders can rely on those equations to know what the outcomes will be, since 
enforceable effluent limits will be based on those outcomes. EPA’s Proposal does not meet 
this basic test.  The process that it sets out for setting standards, using arbitrary 
“unsuppressed” consumption rates and “equal” risk levels that cannot be attained, is so 
subjective that the results cannot be predicted, leading to a wide range of outcomes that are 
not supported by objective scientific evidence.    
 
In addition, we are concerned that States will not be able to effectively and efficiently 
implement the new requirements.  The Proposal calls for State water agencies to collect and 
analyze data on issues that they have neither the expertise nor the resources to address 
adequately.   Also, it will lead to substantial delays in State actions to adopt and revise their 
water quality standards, since it will make that task much more difficult and time-consuming.  
Before adopting any such requirements, EPA needs to conduct the broad dialogue suggested 
above, with State agencies, Tribes, regulated parties, and other 
stakeholders, to determine how best to protect Tribal rights in the process 

EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Office of Water Docket 
March 6, 2023 
Page 9 
 
 
of setting WQS under the CWA.  The FWQC looks forward to participating in such a 
dialogue. 
 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
 
The FWQC appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments on the EPA 
Proposal.  Please feel free to call or e-mail if you have any questions, or if you would like 
any additional information concerning the issues raised in these comments. 
 
 
 
Fredric P. Andes 
Coordinator

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0168 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
To whom it may concern,
We are so grateful to be given the opportunity to read the proposed rule about Water Quality 
Standards and be able to leave comments. As four citizens of the United States we are very 
concerned about the tribal communities being affected by the water regulations. Many tribal 
communities value aquatic life and, therefore, water quality is extremely important and 
standards must be maintained for these tribes and their ways of life.
It is extremely important that the talk and rulings about the Water Quality Standards are 
communicated with the people in the state, especially the people in the tribes. The information 
on rulings and regulations, furthermore, must be communicated in a manner that is straight 
forward. Reading the document is tedious and can be difficult to interpret because of its 
ambiguous nature. 
EPA is on the right track in terms of their stance regarding the protection of aquatic wildlife and 
water contaminants. Furthermore, the statements to communicate with tribes about water 
regulation is very necessary and, we agree, that the tribes must be notified of any changes. 
Sincerely,
Juli Westfall
Maddie Walker
Bria Rizzo
Khalid Alasmari

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0308 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 1 of 29 
TRIBAL CHIEF 
Clarissa Sabattis 
 
TRIBAL COUNCIL 
 
Beth Aucoin 
Suzanne Desiderio 
John Flewelling 
Catherine St. John 
Mary Tomah 
Crystal Tucker 
HOULTON BAND OF 
MALISEET INDIANS 
 
Administration 
(207) 532-4273 
In-State 
1-800-564-8524 
Out-of-State 
1-800-545-8524 
Fax 
(207) 532-2660 
 
 
Submitted online at Federal eRulemaking Portal: https://www.regulations.gov/ 
 
March 6, 2023 
Michael Regan  
Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of the Administrator, Mail Code 1101A 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE:   
Comments on Environmental Protection Agency Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 -- Water 
Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (Proposed Rule) 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
The Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians (HBMI or Band) submits these comments in response to the 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) “Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights (Proposed Rule),” 87 Fed. Reg. 74,361 (Dec. 5, 2023). The Band thanks EPA for its efforts to 
“provide a nationally applicable regulatory framework to ensure that [water quality standards (WQS)] protect 
applicable reserved rights.” Id. at 74,366. We concur that the proposed rule will provide “clarity, predictability, and 
transparency,” and that there is an urgent need for this. Id. EPA’s efforts to propose a “uniform approach for 
establishment of WQS where tribal reserved rights apply and [to] clearly [lay] out how EPA will review such 
WQS” are appreciated. Not only will this ensure a consistent approach across regions, but it will also ensure more 
durable decisions. While we offer several critical changes to the proposed rule (“Reserved Rights Rule” or “rule”), 
the Band generally supports the rule and looks forward to working with EPA and Maine to implement it, so long as 
Maine is permitted to set WQS in waters in which HBMI holds reserved rights.1   
I.  
THE HOULTON BAND OF MALISEET INDIANS IS A RIVERINE PEOPLE THAT RELIES ON 
SUSTENANCE FISHING AND OTHER WATER-DEPENDENT RESERVED RIGHTS IN THE 
MEDUXNEKEAG RIVER AND ITS TRIBUTARIES FOR ITS HEALTH, SPIRITUALITY, AND 
CULTURE. 
 
The Maliseets are riverine people who continue to traditionally fish, trap, hunt, and gather in our ancestral 
waters. We are the Wolastoqewiyik, or “People of the Beautiful, Flowing River.”  Our unique tribal culture and 
traditions are entwined with our environment. A clean environment is essential to support our cultural ways. The 
“Wolastoq,” the river of our name, is now called the St. John, and its watershed is now bisected by an international 
boundary. We, the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, are a federally recognized Indian tribe on the United States 
 
1 The Houlton Band continues to dispute EPA’s February 2015 determination that “MICSA granted the state authority to set 
WQS in waters in Indian lands.” 81 Fed. Reg. 23,239, 23,241 (April 20, 2016) (describing decision). We direct your attention 
to comments the Houlton Band submitted to EPA Region 1 on September 13, 2013 explaining our position.  
 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 2 of 29 
side of that border, while many Maliseets live on First Nation Reserves in Canada. Since federal recognition in 
1980, our Band has been purchasing trust lands in Aroostook County, Maine, including substantial trust holdings 
on both banks of the Meduxnekeag River, a tributary of the St. John.2  We call our Band “Metahksoniqewiyik” or 
People of the Meduxnekeag River. Meduxnekeag is derived from a Maliseet word that translates loosely as “rocky 
at its mouth.”   
  
 
The Maliseet are renowned birch bark canoe builders. Our homelands, filled with productive soils that now 
grow potatoes, once grew the biggest and best canoe birches. With these light, flexible, sturdy craft, we traveled the 
rivers and streams of the Wolastoq watershed to reach our hunting grounds and portaged to streams and rivers in 
other watersheds, a tradition that continues today. Our people have camped, fished, and gathered ash for baskets 
and fiddleheads for food, as well as traditional medicines, along the Meduxnekeag (including those stretches along 
which the Band now owns property) for generations. Evidence of prehistoric activities at least as old as 8,000 years 
exists in fields along the Meduxnekeag. The Band has focused on purchasing lands along the Meduxnekeag to 
ensure that the tribal community can continue these same traditional activities now and into the future.  
 
 
The link to our ancestors is so strong and the land and water so important to us that we have fought to 
rebuild our community and revitalize our culture here despite pushback from the State of Maine and a local 
municipality. We have re-established our community adjacent to the Meduxnekeag to provide greater access to the 
best fishing holes and the abundance of brown ash and fiddlehead ferns in the river’s floodplains. Harvesting 
fiddlehead ferns in the spring for food and as a spring tonic continues to be a very important traditional practice.3 
And making beautiful, sturdy woven baskets from brown ash is a strong and vital part of our enduring culture. With 
these and other traditional practices in mind, the mission of the tribe’s Natural Resources Department is to sustain 
and manage HBMI’s natural resources for the continuing benefit of Maliseet human, cultural, and ecosystem 
health. 
 
  
In the mid-1980s, when we first began purchasing trust land along the Meduxnekeag, the river was 
routinely choked with prolific algal blooms, including long filaments of algae during the dry summer season. The 
river would often turn brown with sediments after a rainfall and was contaminated with high levels of bacteria. 
Unfortunately, these types of water quality problems continue. See Photographs (Attachment 2). As we instituted 
an environmental program in the 1990s with a strong emphasis on water resources management and water quality, 
we also learned that fish in the river were contaminated with mercury and DDT. Regarding the Attainment Status 
for 6 miles of the Meduxnekeag River in Houlton, in 1995, the Maine Department of Environmental Protection 
noted that the “water quality model indicates that this water body segment may not be meeting the Class B . . . 
dissolved oxygen standard. The causes of non-attainment are the discharge of municipal wastewater and 
agricultural activities within the watershed.”  State of Maine 1994 Water Quality Assessment Appendix. Maine 
DEP also listed this section as a “priority” in the Table of Water Quality-Limited Rivers and Streams in Maine. 
More recently, we have learned of PFAS contamination in the fish that swim through our waters. See also Nicole 
Ogrysko, New Research Shows Dangers of Consuming Freshwater Fish Laced with PFAS, Maine Public (Jan. 24, 
2023), https://www.mainepublic.org/environment-and-outdoors/2023-01-24/new-research-shows-dangers-of-
consuming-freshwater-fish-laced-with-pfas (Attachment 3). 
 
 
All tribal trust lands bordering the Meduxnekeag fall within this 6-mile stretch and are located downstream 
of the vast majority of activities that impact water quality in the watershed. Early on, the Band’s environmental 
department determined that its water quality problems originate off tribal lands. Currently, we have no facilities 
that discharge effluent into any water body, and we have no plans for any. However, we are directly impacted by 
two facilities upstream from Tribal lands, a starch factory and a wastewater treatment plant that discharge effluent 
into the Meduxnekeag. 
  
 
2 As discussed in greater detail below, these trust lands are a reservation for purposes of federal law. 
 
3 For instance, please see the September 2015 Skitkomeq Nutacomit Newsletter describing fiddlehead gathering and some of 
the other water dependent traditional activities Maliseets continue to engage in and pass on to younger generations. See Series 
of HBMI newsletters describing some of the contemporary traditional uses of water (Attachment 1). 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 3 of 29 
 
A critical Tribal priority, and the Natural Resources Department’s mission, is to maintain the natural 
environment that supports the fish, animals, and plants on our lands and territories in order to preserve and protect 
our culture and traditions or “common welfare” of the Tribe. Band members want to continue traditional activities 
such as sustenance fishing, gathering fiddleheads and medicines, and making baskets sustainably and without fear 
of contamination. Environmental protection for the Maliseet equates to cultural survival. Our language, history, 
legends, tradition, and culture are deeply rooted in nature. We believe that all of creation is important, nature must 
be in balance, and that we all suffer when we disturb that balance. Tribal culture and tradition require the Band to 
manage, protect and enhance the environment so that the web of life will continue to support future generations.  
 
 
Unlike most of the inhabitants of Maine, the Maliseet are tied to the environment for our very existence. 
The foods and traditional practices of our ancestors still sustain the community today. It is not simply a matter of 
economics that hunting, fishing and sustenance gathering of foods is “free,” as some people would believe. Our 
biology is designed to thrive on foods such as fiddleheads (emerging ostrich fern), berries, fish, and game, not the 
refined foods to which society at large has become accustomed.  Pollutants and a degraded environment make these 
foods scarce and/or contaminated, thereby driving some in our community to abandon traditional diets for more 
processed foods. This has led to an increase in diabetes and other health issues, resulting in shorter life 
expectancies for the tribal community than the general population. Despite fish consumption advisories established 
by the State of Maine, other Maliseet families continue to eat large amounts of fish from the river for their daily 
sustenance and risk exposure to higher levels of environmental contaminants than most of the general population. 
 
Many of our members fish to feed themselves and their families, and to share with elders and others who 
can no longer fish. Our membership fish throughout the fishing season, including ice fishing in the winter. 
Gathering aquatic plants remains an important cultural tradition, as well. For instance, the tribal government sets 
aside a day every year for fiddleheading. On this day, staff is encouraged to gather fiddleheads on the nearby 
riverbanks of the Meduxnekeag to prepare and freeze for the many traditional feasts hosted throughout the year. 
The river is also essential for certain ceremonial activities, including the water ceremony and sweat lodge. 
Photographs (Attachment 2) (photographs of sweat lodge and water ceremony). Sweat lodges are held to heal and 
honor the spirit, and they use all the elements and gifts of creation. Willow or birch trees are used to build the 
frame, cedar is used to cover the floor, river stones are heated in a fire, and water from the river is poured on the 
hot rocks to generate steam and to carry prayers and offerings to all of creation. Every summer our youth group 
spends time fishing, canoeing, and picking medicines, all the time learning about their ties to the natural world to 
ensure these traditions carry forward. Photographs (Attachment 2) (photographs of youth engaged in these 
activities). 
 
 
Not only are the Maliseet diet and traditions tied directly to the environment, Maliseet language and 
spirituality is intrinsically linked to it as well. The gift of water is one of the essential teachings of the Maliseet. 
Water not only signifies a crucial component of all life, it also honors the spirit. In the Maliseet language, water – 
samaqan is a living entity. Therefore, Peskotomuhkati Wolasoqewi Latuwewakon, a Passamaquoddy-Maliseet 
Dictionary, lists 55 different words for water. Our language has words to describe various states of water:  
ososqopekot - it is muddy water; cinitomehson - it is very shallow water; and nolomopeq – the water upriver; and 
so on. We are a people who have lived in our homeland since the beginning of creation. We believe that all 
creation, the animals, plants, rocks, and elements have spirits and are our relations. We refer to the land as Mother 
Earth and refer to the rocks and stones as our ancestors, those who have been here since the dawn of creation. 
Many of our stories reflect this belief. Our tradition tells us we were created from the brown ash tree. Several years 
ago, Fred Tomah, tribal elder and basket maker, related a Maliseet tale during an EPA Tribal Training session that 
describes the adventures of a journeying Indian. We learn at the end the story of the Indian is the dream of a 
partridge sleeping in a tree. Many tales speak of animals turning into humans and humans turning into animals. 
Noxious insects come into being when the troublesome shaman Poktcinskwes, upon dying, turns herself into bees, 
hornets, flies and mosquitos. 
  
 
The significance of the River in our culture is reflected in the tales of Gluskap, our culture-hero. One 
Maliseet tale recounts an episode in the life of Gluskap when he frees the waters of the Wolastoq from the dams of 
beavers who in that long ago time were much larger than they are today. Gluskap also created many of the 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 4 of 29 
outcroppings, islands, and stream outlets along the Wolastoq. In another tale, Gluskap helps a band of Indians 
whose water had become fouled by the serpent Akwulabemu. Gluskap kills Akwulabemu and “straight away the 
springs and brooks filled with water that was clean and pure.”  In another Gluskap tale, Wind Bird, Chief Raven’s 
band has not hunted or fished in many days because it so windy they cannot get near any game and do not dare 
launch a canoe. Gluskap advises Chief Raven to send the Caribou boys up the mountain where the Wind Bird lives 
to tie his wings. But when they do so no wind blows at all. All the waters become stagnant and too warm for there 
was no cooling breeze. After consulting with Gluskap, Chief Raven sends the Caribou boys to untie one of the 
Wind Bird’s wings and let him loose. Since then, everything has gone well.  
 
   
We have been fighting to retain, rebuild, and protect our ancestral ways for over 400 years. Unlike other 
ethnic peoples, we have no other homeland to return to in order to learn about our cultural heritage. We are the last 
bastions of the unique language, history, traditions, stories, ceremonies, and spiritual beliefs that make up our 
culture. When contamination and habitat degradation make it impossible to hunt, fish, or gather plants and 
medicines or to engage in our ceremonial practices in accordance with our traditions, we cannot pick up our trust 
lands and move them away from the sources of pollution. When a natural resource is adversely impacted or 
damaged by influences beyond the Band’s control, a vital part of our cultural link is forever broken. Accordingly, 
preservation and protection of natural resources is preservation and protection of tribal culture.  
 
  
When we asked our membership to answer questions about trust lands and natural resources they wanted to 
purchase and how they want to use them, we also asked them to tell us anything else they wanted at the end of the 
survey. See Aroostook Band of Micmacs And Houlton Band of Maliseets Integrated Resources Management Plan 
Survey Report of Land Use and Natural Resource Priorities, at 77-78 (Attachment 4). These are some of their 
responses: 
 
• 
“Culture and genealogy are very important - my grandfather hiked and trapped here, my great grandma 
use to gather wood here. I desire that the old ways be embedded in the young generations.” 
• 
“I think that land that would sustain life would be the best to purchase.” 
• 
“I think if we purchase land we should leave it in its original habitat and state. It would keep all the 
animals in the area for hunting and fishing.” 
• 
“I would love to see pristine nature made available.” 
• 
“I think that buying tribal lands is really great. It gives people a chance to explore the wilderness and to 
get to know themselves.” 
• 
“If possible it would be nice to purchase both land to be developed and land to be preserved.” 
• 
“I like anything we have. I like nature and animals that god brought to this earth.” 
• 
“I believe that our past is just as important; because our people have lost a big part of our past, we should 
rebuild our past in order to make an honest future for our children and grandchildren; you see our ways 
someday will be back. We need to teach our young people now for the future.” 
• 
“Remember our Future, the Children.”  
 
In view of our membership’s needs and goals, for the past 30 years, HBMI has been working diligently on 
its own and in partnership with others to improve water quality in the Meduxnekeag Watershed. In 1995, HBMI 
established its water quality monitoring program to assess the health of the Meduxnekeag and the progress being 
made to address water quality impacts. To model good land management in the watershed, HBMI has implemented 
numerous best management practices on its trust lands to prevent soil and polluted storm water from entering the 
Meduxnekeag, including taking highly erodible land out of production and establishing sediment basins, a nutrient 
and sediment control structure, and extensive riparian buffer plantings. HBMI continues to monitor potential 
sources of nonpoint pollution from its current landholdings and address issues on new land purchases.  
 
Examples of partnership projects include a demonstration project with a local farmer to keep livestock 
from entering a small tributary, an in-stream fish habitat restoration project, storm water management 
implementation with the Town of Houlton, and a large multi-partner project promoting the use of agricultural soil 
conservation practices. Other activities include joint watershed assessment, planning, data sharing (HBMI monitors 
ambient water quality with continuous data collectors at approximately 36 sites within the Meduxnekeag River and 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 5 of 29 
its tributaries) and clean up (from trash to legacy oil and pesticide contamination). Our goal always is to preserve 
and protect our people and culture by preserving, protecting, and enhancing our limited and precious natural 
resources on our trust lands forever, including the waters that flow through the heart of our community. Given this, 
we see great need for the Reserved Rights Rule and support EPA’s finalization of it. 
 
II. 
EPA’S PROPOSAL TO PROTECT TRIBAL RESERVED RIGHTS THROUGH WATER 
QUALITY STANDARDS IS CONSISTENT WITH—AND DEMANDED BY—BOTH FEDERAL 
INDIAN LAW AND THE CLEAN WATER ACT. 
Clean water is necessary to support tribal lifeways. It is a matter of vital importance to all people of the 
State of Maine, and of particularly vital importance to the Band, whose cultural, spiritual and subsistence practices 
require consuming much higher levels of aquatic species—including fish, wildlife, and plants that are vulnerable to 
toxic chemicals—than the general population. In order to safely eat fish and to ensure fish populations are of 
harvestable size, as well as to exercise our other reserved rights, the habitat upon which they depend must be clean 
and protected. Although highly dependent on clean water, until very recently, EPA and the State of Maine had not 
considered the Band’s reserved rights when developing water quality standards, and therefore, the Band historically 
has not been afforded the full protection of the Clean Water Act. In turn, this has placed the burden of non-native 
development and industry on the Band, forcing it to choose between engaging in cultural and subsistence practices 
or sacrificing the health and welfare of tribal elders, tribal children, and other tribal members. As our Trustee, the 
U.S. Government must meet its trust obligation to the Band and ensure that stringent water quality standards are 
promulgated to ensure the protection of our reserved rights.  
A.  
EPA’s Description of Tribal Reserved Rights and the Federal Indian Law That Requires 
Their Protection Is Accurate and Necessarily Includes the Band’s Trust Lands. 
The Band appreciates EPA’s commitment to doing that through promulgation of the Reserved Rights Rule. 
EPA is correct that “tribal reserved rights to resources are an intrinsic part of tribal life and are of deep cultural, 
economic, and subsistence importance to tribes.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,363. In the preamble to the proposed rule, the 
agency describes well the origin and sources of reserved rights. Id. at 74,363-64. The agency also correctly 
acknowledges that “tribal reserved rights encompass subsidiary rights that are not explicitly addressed in treaty or 
statutory language but are necessary to render those rights meaningful.”4 Id. at 74,364 (citing United States v. 
Winans, 198 U.S. 371, 381 (1905); United States v. Washington, 853 F.3d 946, 966 (9th Cir. 2017), aff’d, 138 S. 
Ct. 1832 (per curiam)).  
Chief among these implied, subsidiary rights—for EPA’s purposes—is the reality that the environment 
must be of sufficient quality to ensure the subject of the right—whether it be fish, shellfish, beaver, muskrat, 
seaweed, wild rice, fiddlehead ferns, and many other aquatic or aquatic-dependent species—can thrive and remain 
available for tribal members to use, and to do so safely. Without the clean water that allows this, many rights 
reserved by tribes would be rendered worthless. E.g., Winans, 198 U.S. at 381 (the right of taking fish at usual and 
accustomed areas necessarily included the right of access to those areas as “[n]o other conclusion would give effect 
to the treaty”); United States v. Washington, 853 F.3d at 965 (“The Indians reasonably understood Governor 
Stevens to promise not only that they would have access to their usual and accustomed fishing places, but also that 
there would be fish sufficient to sustain them.”); see also Letter from Hilary C. Tompkins, Solicitor, Dep’t of 
Interior, to Avi Garbow, General Counsel, EPA, regarding Maine’s WQS and Tribal Fishing Rights of Maine 
Tribes (Jan. 30, 2015) (Attachment 5) (“Tribal fishing rights encompass subsidiary rights that are not explicitly 
 
4 Related to this, the Band notes a slight overstatement in EPA’s explanation of how this rule may prove to benefit tribes 
without federally reserved rights or resources in locations to which those rights do not extend. At page 74,378 of the preamble, 
EPA writes, “It is EPA’s expectation that many of the coordination and collaboration processes that will be developed to 
implement this rule will also lead to better protection of aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources not referenced in treaties and 
similar instruments.” While the Band appreciates the sentiment and this likely benefit of the rule, the language is overinclusive. 
Reserved rights do not necessarily need to be “referenced in treaties and similar instruments” since they can arise by 
implication. Such rights must necessarily be included within the scope of the Reserved Rights Rule. 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 6 of 29 
included in treaty or statutory language but are nonetheless necessary to render them meaningful.”); Letter from 
Ann Marie Bledsoe Downes, Principal Deputy Solicitor, Dep’t of Interior, to Jeffrey Prieto, General Counsel, EPA, 
regarding Tribal Fishing Rights of Maine Tribes (Aug. 17, 2022) (Attachment 6); EPA Region 1, Analysis 
Supporting EPA’s February 2, 2015 Decision to Approve, Disapprove, and Make No Decision on, Various Maine 
Water Quality Standards, Including Those Applied to Waters of Indian Lands in Maine, at 27-28 (Feb. 2, 2015) 
(Attachment 7) (“[T]he Tribes’ ability to take fish for their sustenance . . . would be rendered meaningless if it were 
not supported by water quality sufficient to ensure that tribal members can safely eat the fish for their own 
sustenance.”).  
As discussed in detail above, the Maliseets are river people who have fished, hunted, trapped, and gathered 
natural resources in the “Wolastoq” or St. John watershed for thousands of years and continue to engage in the 
traditional activities central to our diet, culture, traditions, spirituality, and health and welfare. The Maliseets, also 
known as the St. John’s Indians, have taken repeated steps to reserve our fishing, hunting, and gathering rights 
since European contact. We forever secured these rights throughout our homeland in the Wolastoq-St. John River 
watershed in several eighteenth-century treaties. The Treaty of Portsmouth, signed on July 13, 1713, by 
representatives of the British Crown and several Indian tribes located in New England, including the St. John’s 
Indians, reserved “unto the said Indians their own Grounds, and free liberty for Hunting, Fishing, Fowling, and all 
other [of] their lawful liberties and privileges . . .” as previously recognized. Available at 
http://www.1713treatyofportsmouth.com/treaty1.cfm. Twelve years later, the St. John’s Indians entered 
Mascarene’s Treaty of 1725, in which the British Crown promised that “the Indians shall not be molested in their 
persons, Hunting, Fishing and Planting Grounds nor in any other [of] their Lawfull [sic] Occassions [sic] by His 
Majestys [sic] Subjects or their Dependants [sic] . . . .” See Andrea Bear Nicholas, Mascarene’s Treaty of 1725, 
(1994) 43 U.N.B. L.J. 3-18, at 17, available at https://caid.ca/MascTreaty1725.pdf.5 They also entered Dummer’s 
Treaty in December 1825, reserving “the Privilege of Fishing, Hunting & Fowling as formerly” in their homeland. 
Available at https://www.cbu.ca/indigenous-affairs/mikmaq-resource-centre/treaties/treaty-of-1725/. Fifty years 
later, the Maliseets, under the name of the St. John’s Indians, were signatory to the very first treaty entered by the 
United States—the Treaty of Watertown on July 19, 1776, just 15 days after the Declaration of Independence. Our 
Maliseet ancestors and those of the Mi’kmaqs agreed to send 600 of our warriors to fight alongside General 
Washington against Great Britain, and the United States solemnly promised to protect and provide for us.   
 
We again secured protection for our hunting, fishing, and gathering rights through the 1980 Maine Indian 
Claims Settlement Act, Pub. L. No. 96-420 (MICSA), and the 1986 Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians 
Supplementary Claims Settlement Act, Pub. L. No. 99-566 (HBMI Act). A key purpose of MICSA was to allow 
the Band to continue to exercise these rights. See, e.g., S. Rep. No. 96-957 at 11 (“All three tribes are riverine in 
their land-ownership orientation. . . . The aboriginal territory of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians is centered 
on the Saint John River.”). MICSA and the HBMI Act accordingly provided a homeland for the Houlton Band by 
setting aside “land or natural resources” in trust for the Band.6 See 25 U.S.C. § 1724(d); 25 U.S.C. § 1724(d), Note, 
 
5 Mascarene’s Treaty consists of two separate components—Mascarene’s Treaty of 1725 and Mascarene’s Promises. See, e.g., 
R. v. McCoy (N.B.C.A.), [1993] N.B.J. No. 597, at ¶ 8 (including the language of Mascarene’s Promises in Mascarene’s 
Treaty of 1725). The former primarily contains the promises and obligations of the tribes, and the latter contains the promises 
and obligations of the Crown. See Nicholas, 43 U.N.B. L.J. at 15-18.   
6 While MICSA does not speak directly to the Houlton Band’s water and fishing rights, nothing in MICSA demonstrates, or 
even suggests, the absence of federally-protected water and fishing rights for the Maliseets. First, as discussed above, it is well-
established that when the United States sets aside lands in trust for an Indian tribe, it impliedly reserves water and fishing 
rights, regardless of whether the treaty, statute, or executive order expressly refers to such rights. See, e.g., United States v. 
Aanerud, 893 F.2d 956, 958 (8th Cir. 1990) (holding that tribal members have federally-protected right to harvest natural 
resources on tribal lands notwithstanding silence in treaty setting aside lands for tribe). Second, MICSA contemplates these 
rights, defining the “lands or natural resources” held in trust for the Houlton Band to include “any interest in or right involving 
any real property or natural resources, including . . . water and water rights, and hunting and fishing rights.” 25 U.S.C. § 
1722(b). Third, Congress confirmed in MICSA that Maliseet trust lands would be treated in the same manner as any other 
Indian reservation, see 25 U.S.C. § 1725(i), and the Department of the Interior has confirmed that Maliseet trust lands are an 
Indian reservation for purposes of federal law. 1993 Solicitor Letter. (Attachment 8).  

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 7 of 29 
Public Law No. 99-566, § 4(a) (Oct. 27, 1986). The United States Department of the Interior confirmed on January 
15, 1993 that Maliseet trust lands acquired under MICSA—located on both banks of the Meduxnekeag River, a 
tributary of the St. John—are an Indian reservation for purposes of federal law. See 1993 Solicitor Letter 
(Attachment 8).  
 
As a matter of federal Indian law, the lands and natural resources held in trust by the United States for the 
benefit of the Houlton Band include water and fishing rights. Federal common law is clear that when Congress sets 
aside lands in trust for the use and benefit of an Indian tribe or individual Indians, as it did for the Houlton Band, 
Congress impliedly reserves water and fishing rights on those lands. See, e.g., Menominee Tribe of Indians v. 
United States, 391 U.S. 404, 405-06 (1968) (holding that lands acquired for a tribe in exchange for the 
relinquishment of other lands include implied hunting and fishing rights); Arizona v. California, 373 U.S. 546, 599 
(1963) (finding implied water rights where “water from the River would be essential to the life of the Indian people 
and to the animals they hunted and the crops they raised”); Winters v. United States, 207 U.S. 564, 577 (1908) 
(holding that tribe impliedly reserved water rights to support beneficial use of its lands). This reservation of rights 
occurs regardless of whether the lands are set aside by treaty, executive order, or statute. See, e.g., United States v. 
Dion, 476 U.S. 734, 745 n.8 (1986) (“Indian reservations created by statute, agreement, or executive order 
normally carry with them the same implied hunting rights as those created by treaty.”); see also Fishing Rights of 
the Yurok and Hoopa Valley Tribes, Op. of Solicitor, 1993 DEP SO LEXIS 9, at *30 (Oct. 4, 1993). For example, 
in Alaska Pacific Fisheries Co. v. United States, 248 U.S. 78, 86-88 (1918), the Supreme Court held that where 
Congress set aside lands for the landless Metlakahtla Indians, it impliedly reserved fishing rights in adjacent 
waters. The Indians were historically fishers and hunters, and the lands were chosen to provide them access to the 
fishing grounds. Id. at 88-89. Similarly, in Colville Confederated Tribes v. Walton, 647 F.2d 42, 48 (9th Cir. 1981), 
the Court held that Congress impliedly reserved water rights to support the tribal fishery on tribal trust lands where 
“[t]he Colvilles traditionally fished for both salmon and trout. Like other Pacific Northwest Indians, fishing was of 
economic and religious importance to them.” Id.; see also Fishing Rights of the Yurok and Hoopa Valley Tribes, 
Op. of Solicitor at *30 (“[A]t the time the reservations were created, the United States was well aware of the 
Indians’ dependence upon the fishery. A specific, primary purpose for establishing the reservations was to secure to 
the Indians the access and right to fish without interference from others.”). 
 
As with those tribes, through MICSA, Congress acquired lands in trust for the benefit of the Houlton Band 
to provide the landless Maliseet Indians a home where we could preserve our riverine culture and engage in 
traditional fishing, hunting, and gathering activities. See S. Rep. No. 96-957 at 11 (recognizing Houlton Band is 
“riverine in [its] land-ownership orientation”); id. at 24 (“The Houlton Band is impoverished, it is small in number, 
it has no trust fund to look to, and it is questionable whether the land to be acquired for it will be utilized in an 
income-producing fashion in the foreseeable future.”).  As the Department of the Interior expected, the Tribe’s 
reservation is located in eastern Aroostook County on the Meduxnekeag River, adjacent to one of the river’s best 
fishing holes. See H.R. Rep. No. 96-1353 (Report of the Department of the Interior, Aug. 25, 1980). Federal law is 
clear that in reserving these lands Congress concurrently reserved water and fishing rights for the Tribe, which the 
Reserved Rights Rule must protect. 
 
EPA’s role as trustee, moreover, carries with it the duty and power to protect tribal reserved rights. United 
States v. Kagama, 118 U.S. 375, 383-84 (1886). The trust responsibility imposes upon the United States and all its 
agencies the obligation to follow “the most exacting fiduciary standards” in dealing with the tribes, including in the 
protection of tribal rights and property. Seminole Nation v. United States, 316 U.S. 286, 296-97 (1942); Parravano 
v. Babbitt, 70 F.3d 539, 546-47 (9th Cir. 1995) (recognizing the United States’ trust obligation to protect impliedly 
reserved fishing rights). Consistent with this relationship of trust, federal courts require that ambiguities in federal 
laws regarding tribes must be construed in the tribes’ favor. E.g., Minnesota v. Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa 
Indians, 526 U.S. 172, 200 (1999).  
EPA has long recognized its trust duties to tribes across the nation, including to those tribes located in 
Maine. See, e.g., EPA, Policy for the Administration of Environmental Programs on Indian Reservations (Nov. 8, 
1984), available at http://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-04/documents/indian-policy-84.pdf; EPA Policy 
on Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribes at 3 (May 4, 2011), available at 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 8 of 29 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2013-08/documents/cons-and-coord-with-indian-tribes-policy.pdf 
[hereinafter EPA Consultation Policy] (“EPA recognizes the federal government’s trust responsibility, which 
derives from the historical relationship between the federal government and Indian tribes as expressed in certain 
treaties and federal Indian law.”). In fact, the agency commemorated the 30th anniversary of, and reaffirmed, its 
1984 Indian Policy, indicating that EPA should use its authority to protect tribal rights and resources when it is 
within its discretion to do so. See EPA Administrator McCarthy, Memorandum Commemorating the 30th 
Anniversary of EPA’s Indian Policy at 1 (Dec. 1, 2014), available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-
05/documents/indianpolicytreatyrightsmemo2014.pdf. And just last year, EPA again formally reaffirmed the EPA 
Policy for the Administration of Environmental Programs on Indian Reservations, stating “the EPA reiterates its 
recognition that the United States has a unique legal relationship with tribal governments based on the Constitution, 
treaties, statutes, executive orders and court decisions. . . . The reaffirmation of the 1984 Indian Policy articulates 
the importance of the EPA’s tribal programs and our relationship with tribal governments. . . . It is an important 
time in our partnership with tribes as the EPA builds on past successes and strives to meet current and future 
environmental challenges with tribes.” Michael S. Regan, Reaffirmation of the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency’s Indian Policy (Sept. 30, 2021), https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-09/oita-21-000-
6427.pdf. EPA itself has described its “fundamental objective in carrying out its responsibilities in Indian country” 
as “to protect human health and the environment.” EPA Consultation Policy at 3; EPA, EPA Policy on 
Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribes: Guidance for Discussing Tribal Treaty Rights at 2, available at 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-
02/documents/tribal_treaty_rights_guidance_for_discussing_tribal_treaty_rights.pdf (acknowledging “implied right 
to sufficient water quantity or water quality to ensure that fishing is possible” attendant to reserved rights).  
 
EPA has previously concluded, correctly, that the trust responsibility applies in Maine. 68 Fed. Reg. at 
65,067. When delegating EPA’s Clean Water Act authority over Passamaquody and Penobscot waters to Maine, 
the agency stated that “the argument that the trust doctrine finds no application in Maine defies the terms of 
MICSA.” Id. “MICSA itself establishes trust resources for which the federal government is responsible and 
identifies tribal governments with which agencies such as EPA should work on a government-to-government basis 
consistent with that trust responsibility.”7  Id. In short, EPA’s role as trustee carries with it the duty and power to 
protect the Houlton Band’s members from the negative effects of water-borne toxics and other pollutants to their 
health, culture, and subsistence.   
 
A 2000 Solicitor’s Opinion written in regard to Maine’s initial application for the delegation of National 
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) authority in Indian waters in Maine confirms this conclusion. 
The Solicitor wrote, “[E]ven if EPA approves the state’s application to administer the NPDES program anywhere 
within Indian Country in Maine, including the lands of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians . . . , EPA must 
ensure, through its maintained Clean Water Act authorities and its federal trust obligations, that a state-
administered NPDES program within those lands fully protects the Tribal lands, waters and other resources.” 
Solicitor’s Opinion attached to Letter from Edward B. Cohen, Office of the Solicitor, Dep’t of Interior to Gary S. 
Guzy, Office of General Counsel, Envtl. Protection Agency, at 1 (May 16, 2000) (citations omitted). The Solicitor 
explained that this means:  
 
EPA must, in accordance with the best interest of the Tribes and the “most exacting fiduciary 
standards,” faithfully exercise its federal authority and discretion to protect Maliseet . . . tribal 
water quality from degradation.  EPA would take into consideration more than just the minimum 
requirements in the CWA in overseeing a State program to fully protect Tribal resources, including 
lands and waters.  Specifically, EPA would have to consider the specific uses the Maliseets . . . 
make of their tribal waters, including traditional, ceremonial, medicinal and cultural uses affected 
by water quality.  EPA must be fully satisfied that it is able to meet its trust obligation to the 
Maliseets . . . even if it approves the State of Maine to administer the NPDES program.  EPA 
 
7 The MICSA provisions cited by EPA as support for its conclusions as to the Passamaquoddy Tribe and Penobscot Nation in 
2003 apply with equal force to the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians. See 25 U.S.C. §§ 1721(a)(5), 1722(a), 1724, 1726; see 
also S. Rep. No. 96-957 at 11 (“All three tribes are riverine in their land-ownership orientation. . . .  The aboriginal territory of 
the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians is centered on the Saint John River.”).   

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 9 of 29 
should seek assurances from the State of Maine that the state will implement the NPDES program 
in a manner which satisfies EPA’s trust obligations.   
 
Id. at 2 (citations omitted); 68 Fed. Reg. at 65,059 (“[T]he Department [of Interior] is the federal government’s 
expert agency on Indian law and is charged with administering MICSA. The Supreme Court has made it clear that 
an advisory legal opinion such as DOI’s May 16, 2000 letter is owed respect to the extent it is persuasive.”).   
 
EPA thus must use its authority to protect the broad range of resources of traditional, ceremonial, 
subsistence, commercial, medicinal, and cultural importance to the Band, including land and natural resources, as it 
is in the Reserved Rights Rule. Specifically, the natural resources important here include the water and water-
related resources (fish, aquatic habitat, aquatic vegetation, etc.) in those portions of the Meduxnekeag River and 
other waters used by tribal members for these purposes. MICSA acknowledges these uses, defining “land or natural 
resources” broadly to include “any real property or natural resources, or any interest in or right involving any real 
property or natural resources, including but without limitation . . . water and water rights, and hunting and fishing 
rights.” 25 U.S.C. § 1722(b). How the Clean Water Act is implemented in Maine, including the WQSs 
promulgated, directly affects Tribal trust resources, and, in turn, Tribal members’ health, fishing opportunity, and 
ability to pass their culture on from one generation to the next. EPA’s proposed rule will help ensure that tribal 
rights and natural resources are protected, and will help ensure the United States fulfills the solemn and perpetual 
trust obligation owed to the Houlton Band. We encourage EPA to expeditiously finalize the proposed rule, so that 
any uncertainty regarding the state of Maine’s and EPA’s obligations may be resolved and the full benefits of the 
proposed rule may be realized as swiftly as possible. Moreover, in addition to the anti-degradation requirements of 
the Clean Water Act, the trust obligation similarly imposes an anti-backsliding mandate upon the agency to protect 
continuously the quality of Maliseet waters, which are the lifeblood of the Maliseet people and which support the 
fish, animals, and plants at the core of our diet and culture. 
 
For many years and on many occasions, EPA has recognized these fundamental obligations to the Houlton 
Band and other tribes in its decision making and defense of its decisions regarding water quality. E.g., EPA, Mem. 
in Supp. of Mot. for Summ. J. at 16, Montana v. U.S. Env’t Prot. Agency, 941 F. Supp. 945 (D. Mont. 1996) 
(“Tribes require clean water for a domestic water supply and to maintain fish, aquatic life and other wildlife for 
both subsistence and cultural reasons . . . In short, clean water is a crucial resource that plays a central role in Tribal 
culture. Because clean water has a direct effect on the . . . health and welfare of . . . Tribes that is serious and 
substantial, . . . Tribes have a strong interest in regulating on-reservation water quality.”); Revision of Certain 
Federal Water Quality Criteria Applicable to Washington, 80 Fed. Reg. 55,063, 55,066 (Sept. 14, 2015) (“[M]any 
tribes hold reserved rights to take fish for subsistence, ceremonial, religious, and commercial purposes, including 
treaty-reserved rights to fish at all usual and accustomed fishing grounds and stations . . . . Such rights include not 
only a right to take those fish, but necessarily include an attendant right to not be exposed to unacceptable health 
risks by consuming those fish.”); State Program Requirements: Approval of Application by Maine to Administer 
the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Program, 68 Fed. Reg. 65,052, 65,056 (Nov. 18, 
2003) (“Clearly, the physical setting of the southern tribes in such close proximity to important rivers makes 
surface water quality important to them and their riverine culture.”); Promulgation of Certain Federal Water 
Quality Standards Applicable to Maine, 81 Fed. Reg. 92,466, 92,479 (Dec. 19, 2016) (“[T]he Tribes’ ability to take 
fish for their sustenance . . . would be rendered meaningless if it were not supported under the CWA by water 
quality sufficient to ensure that tribal members can safely eat the fish for their own sustenance.”). But until now, 
EPA’s commitment to these obligations has varied across EPA regions and across different administrations. See, 
e.g., 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,364-65, 74,370 (describing human health criteria decisions in Washington and Maine). 
 
The Band is pleased to support EPA in its decision to bring greater clarity and transparency to its Clean 
Water Act oversight obligations and agency decision making by codifying the simple yet fundamental rights and 
obligations described both here and in the preamble to the Reserved Rights Rule (87 Fed. Reg. at 74,363-66). This 
will bring consistency in CWA Section 303(c) oversight and decision making that implicates treaties and other 
sources of federal law reflecting reserved rights. EPA correctly states: “Tribal reserved rights to aquatic resources 
could be impaired by water quality levels that limit right holders’ ability to utilize their rights . . . . In exercising its 
CWA section 303(c) authority, EPA has an obligation to ensure that its actions are consistent with treaties, statutes, 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 10 of 29 
executive orders, and other sources of Federal law reflecting tribal reserved rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,364. By 
promulgating the Reserved Rights Rule, EPA will finally codify what it has long acknowledged: that tribes require 
clean water sufficient to support the tribal resources and uses that are the subject of their reserved rights, and that 
the Clean Water Act must be applied to ensure that protection.  
B.  
The Clean Water Act Has Not Adequately Protected Tribal Reserved Rights to Date But Can 
and Must Do So Now. 
The proposed Reserved Rights Rule does not come a moment too soon. Although the Clean Water Act 
recently celebrated its 50th anniversary, it has failed to meet its objectives in many waters in which tribes hold 
reserved rights that depend on clean water. At the outset of this letter, we detailed the types of water pollution 
problems we have had throughout waters in which we hold reserved rights. Unfortunately, we are not alone. Across 
the nation, tribes suffer from these same gaps in Clean Water Act protection and enforcement. Despite five decades 
of Clean Water Act implementation, tribes and their members are still burdened by legacy and ongoing pollution 
that impedes full exercise of their rights and diminishes their health. The proposed rule can force swifter and more 
protective action than we’ve seen in the past. And it must. 
As EPA has long acknowledged, “‘[a]ny specific treaty requirements have the force of law,’ and therefore, 
‘State water quality standards will have to meet any treaty requirements.’” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,366 (citing 48 Fed. 
Reg. 51,400, 51,412 (Nov. 8, 1983)). However, whereas EPA previously declined to explicitly require States to 
adopt standards that meet treaty requirements” in its 1983 WQS regulations because such issues had been 
“adequately resolved . . . without the need for regulatory language,” experience since that time makes clear that 
regulatory language is urgently needed for states to understand their obligations with respect to the intersection of 
U.S.-Indian treaties and water quality standards in order to protect tribal reserved rights from the persistent and 
detrimental effects of water pollution. We believe that the Reserved Rights Rule has the potential, after accounting 
for the other comments made herein, to bring transparency and clarity to these issues in the revision and approval 
processes for state water quality standards. Beyond the ineffective implementation of the Clean Water Act 
described above, the Band has suffered the whiplash of inconsistent federal positions on tribal reserved rights and 
has been forced to devote considerable resources to ensuring its rights are protected. A recent example is the fight 
regarding the human health criteria (HHC) in Maine, including the last administration’s reversal in position. The 
Band was offended by EPA’s abandonment of its trust obligations and adherence to the law in the last 
administration when it essentially abandoned defense of the federally promulgated HHC. We therefore support 
EPA’s efforts to develop a more durable and consistent federal policy for the future.  
In particular, we support the proposed rule’s commitment to the establishment of WQS that protect “[t]he 
exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent 
resource” and “the health” of tribal members exercising reserved rights. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378 (proposed 40 
C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(1)-(2)) (emphasis added). While at times the preamble seems somewhat narrowly focused on 
toxics (e.g., human health criteria), we appreciate that the language of the rule itself is sufficient to encompass what 
should be two main drivers of the WQS: human health and habitat health that allows for healthy and abundant 
populations of species that are the subject to tribal reserved rights. This is crucial to ensuring an effective rule that 
does not only reach toxic pollution, but also reaches pernicious water quality problems like nutrient and 
temperature pollution that depress aquatic-dependent populations of species important to the exercise of tribal 
reserved rights, particularly in the era of climate change. In short, the Band believes wholeheartedly that 40 C.F.R. 
§ 131.9 should be amended to ensure that WQS “must protect tribal reserved rights applicable to waters subject to 
such standards,” and believes the Reserved Rights Rule should be finalized as quickly as possible and no later than 
the end of this year. 
The proposed Reserved Rights Rule is entirely consistent with—and even demanded by—the Clean Water 
Act, and it is well within the broad scope of EPA’s statutory authority under the Act. The overarching commitment 
of the Clean Water Act is to “restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the Nation’s 
waters.” 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a). To that end, Congress established a national policy that “the discharge of toxic 
pollutants in toxic amounts be prohibited” and directed that water quality be sufficient to protect and allow the 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 11 of 29 
propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife safe for human consumption by July 1, 1983. See id. § 1251(a)(2), (3). 
The Act is designed to ratchet down the level of pollution over time to allow for ever safer use of the water until all 
uses are protected and remain protected. While the date for accomplishing these goals has long since passed, EPA’s 
efforts through this proposed rule help to ensure the Act’s polices are finally fulfilled as it relates to protecting 
tribal reserved rights wherever they exist in the waters and wetlands of Maine. 
 
Water quality standards are the foundation of the Clean Water Act’s water quality-based control program. 
They define goals for a water body by designating the uses that water body supports or should support (“designated 
uses”); set water quality criteria designed to protect those uses and measure progress made (“criteria”); and 
establish anti-degradation policies, so that existing uses and water quality necessary to support those uses are 
protected and so that bodies with very high-quality water do not become impaired. In order to attain the Act’s goals 
and to protect the uses of water, the Act imposes an obligation on states, with EPA acting in an oversight role, to 
develop water quality standards comprised of designated uses and narrative or numeric water quality criteria 
sufficient to protect uses such as fishing. Id. § 1313(a)-(b). Specifically, Clean Water Act section 303 directs states 
with delegated authority to do the following when they adopt or revise water quality standards for waters of the 
United States. 33 U.S.C. § 1313.  
Whenever the State revises or adopts a new standard, such revised or new standard shall be 
submitted to the Administrator. Such revised or new water quality standard shall consist of the 
designated uses of the navigable waters involved and the water quality criteria for such waters 
based upon such uses. Such standards shall be such as to protect the public health or welfare, 
enhance the quality of water and serve the purposes of this chapter. Such standards shall be 
established taking into consideration their use and value for public water supplies, propagation of 
fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and also 
taking into consideration their use and value for navigation. 
Id. § 1313(c)(2)(A) (emphasis added). As EPA notes in the preamble, whatever WQS a state might adopt must not 
affect or impair the provisions of any treaty of the United States under section 511 of the Act. 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74,364-65; see also 33 U.S.C. § 1371 (“[The Act] shall not be construed as . . . affecting or impairing the 
provisions of any treaty of the United States.”). 
 
While states have the first shot at promulgating protective, science-based water quality standards, EPA is 
obligated under the Act to review and to disapprove a state’s efforts if they fall short of meeting the requirements 
of the Act. Id. § 1313(a)-(c). Furthermore, EPA has independent authority to ensure that a state’s standards are up 
to date and adequate to meet the Act’s requirements. Id. § 1313(c). Thus, where a state fails to act in accordance 
with the statute, EPA is obligated to fulfill the state’s traditional role of issuing standards that comply with the Act. 
In other words, EPA is correct that “the statute’s structure and objectives for the establishment and oversight of 
WQS, including the discretion afforded to EPA, provide ample room for the agency to consider and give effect to 
all applicable reserved rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,365. As EPA notes, it has exercised this authority with regard to 
the human health criteria in Washington and Maine before, and as noted in the previous section, those actions and 
this are consistent with long-standing EPA policy regarding tribal rights and resources. 
III. 
COMMENTS ON SPECIFIC SECTIONS OF THE PROPOSED RESESERVED RIGHTS RULE 
AND ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS POSED BY EPA IN THE PREAMBLE  
 
In this section, the Band provides comments on specific statements in the Federal Register notice and 
proposed rule language, as well as responses to questions specifically raised by EPA regarding the proposed rule. 
A. 
EPA Must Require States To Protect Tribal Reserved Rights By Employing All Three 
Components of Water Quality Standards. 
 
The Federal Register notice indicates that after a state has determined that tribal reserved rights exist in the 
waters over which it has Clean Water Act jurisdiction and the level of water quality necessary to protect those 
rights, “states would be required to revise their WQS if needed to ensure protection of those rights using designated 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 12 of 29 
uses, criteria and/or antidegradation as described at proposed 40 CFR 131.9(c).” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371. The 
proposed regulatory language is: 
(c) In order to meet the requirements in paragraph (a) of this section, States must: 
(1) Designate uses consistent with § 131.10 that either expressly incorporate protection of the tribal 
reserved rights or encompass such rights; and 
(2) Establish water quality criteria consistent with § 131.11 to protect tribal reserved rights; and/or 
(3) Use applicable antidegradation requirements consistent with § 131.12 to maintain and protect 
water quality that protects tribal reserved rights. 
The Band supports specific regulatory language directing states to promulgate each component of water quality 
standards in order to meet the requirements in paragraph (a) of proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9 (“Water quality 
standards must protect tribal reserved rights applicable to waters subject to such standards.”). However, as 
described below, the Band believes that the regulatory language should be stated only in the conjunctive (“and”)—
without use of the phrase “and/or” between subsections (2) and (3)—in order to comport with the requirements of 
the Clean Water Act and its existing implementing regulations, as well as to best meet the goals of the Reserved 
Rights Rule. Consequently, in response to EPA’s query “whether the following two options related to Tier 2 and 
Tier 3 could be used to protect tribal reserved rights in lieu of the options identified in proposed 40 CFR 
131.9(c)(1) and (2) and explained earlier in this section,” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371 (emphasis added), the answer is 
“no.” However, by adding some more specifics about how a state might use or modify its antidegradation policy to 
protect tribal reserved rights in already high quality waters (Tier 3 and potentially Tier 2), we believe that 
antidegradation policies are a legitimate and helpful way for states to protect tribal reserved rights in high quality 
waters in addition to establishing designated uses and water quality criteria them.  
1. 
Water Quality Standards Include Three Components, and EPA Cannot Rely Solely 
on States’ Antidegradation Policies to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights. 
 
The proposed rule suggests one option to protect tribal reserved rights, either alone or in combination with 
others, is for states to revise their antidegradation policies. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371; id. at 74,378 (proposed 40 
C.F.R. § 131.9(c)(2)) (“and/or”). Reliance solely on antidegradation policies, while not utilizing the other options 
EPA proposes, does not meet the plain language of the Clean Water Act and will not adequately protect tribal 
reserved rights. EPA should only be considering the use of antidegradation policies in addition to protective 
designated uses and water quality criteria. 
 
The proposed rule’s preamble explains that the core components of water quality standards are designated 
uses, water quality criteria, and antidegradation requirements. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,362 (citing 33 U.S.C. § 
1313(c)(3)). As explained above, EPA is required to protect reserved rights; forgoing the use of two of the three 
water quality standards core components does not make sense and would not comply with EPA’s obligation to 
protect reserved rights. Importantly, it also would not meet the plain language of the Act, which requires that states’ 
“revised or new water quality standard shall consist of the designated uses of the navigable waters involved and the 
water quality criteria for such waters based upon such uses.” 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(2)(A) (emphasis added). The use 
of “and/or” (both the conjunctive and disjunctive) at proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(c) suggests that states could meet 
the requirements of the Clean Water Act either by completing all three components (designated uses and criteria 
and antidegradation) or by using only its antidegradation policy to meet the requirements of the Act.8 A disjunctive 
 
8 We do not interpret the proposed language as allowing either 1) designated uses and antidegradation policy, but no criteria; or 
2) criteria and antidegradation policy, but no designated uses. If EPA intended either such option to be available to states, it is 
not clear from the regulatory language’s use of the conjunctive between (1) and (2) and the conjunctive/disjunctive between (2) 
and (3). We have not suggested alternative language due to our belief that only the conjunctive “and” should follow each 
subpart. 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 13 of 29 
regulatory list (“or”) would seemingly allow a state to avoid submitting designated uses and criteria in its new or 
revised WQS and is therefore inconsistent with the plain statutory language.9   
 
Beyond the statutory imperatives, the current implementing regulations also would not permit sole reliance 
on antidegradation policies to protect tribal reserved rights in many cases. “Where existing water quality standards 
specify designated uses less than those which are presently being attained, the State shall revise its standards to 
reflect the uses actually being attained.”10 40 C.F.R. § 131.10(i) (emphasis added); see also Idaho Mining Ass’n v. 
Browner, 90 F. Supp. 2d 1078, 1081 (D. Idaho 2000). There is no dispute that tribal exercise of reserved rights is 
and has been occurring at waters under state jurisdiction throughout the country. Consequently, where a state has 
not yet designated tribal reserved right uses for water bodies in which tribes are currently exercising tribal reserved 
rights (at whatever level of use),11 it must do so, and the final Reserved Rights Rule should not introduce confusion 
about that.12 In addition, “States may adopt sub-categories of a use and set the appropriate criteria to reflect varying 
 
9 EPA notes in the preamble that the “proposed rulemaking would complement the existing regulatory requirements set forth in 
EPA’s WQS regulation. In certain circumstances, these existing requirements may already be operating to ensure water quality 
levels are protective of particular tribal reserved rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371. In theory, this is true, and in many cases, EPA 
is correct that already promulgated designated uses (such as “fishing” or “wildlife”) may encompass tribal reserved rights and 
that criteria may exist that are intended to protect those designated uses. However, as suggested by the articles discussed in 
section II.B. above, the agency and states cannot assume that their existing WQS are getting the job done even where tribal 
reserved rights might conceptually fall within those WQS. In the preamble, 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371, EPA states: “EPA’s 
identification of two categories of circumstances where compliance with the proposed rulemaking is most likely to necessitate 
new or revised WQS is consistent with input from tribes during pre-proposal consultation, which focused primarily on 
protection of fish consumers and protection of wild rice. EPA requests comment on whether there are other instances where 
WQS may need to be adjusted to protect tribal reserved rights consistent with this proposed rulemaking. This request for 
comment includes, but is not limited to, whether there are tribal reserved rights to aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources that 
may require more stringent criteria than otherwise required to protect applicable designated uses in order to comply with this 
proposed rulemaking and whether there are differential health risks for right holders associated with activities other than fish 
consumption such that new or revised criteria may be necessary to comply with this proposed rulemaking.” Based on our 
experience, we have to disagree that the scope of likely revisions is so narrow. States, in consultation with tribes, will need to 
take a hard and fresh look at their WQS, including each of the specific things listed in EPA’s query, to see whether they are 
actually protecting tribal reserved rights (including harvestable populations of aquatic and aquatic-dependent species), even if 
their WQS theoretically should have been doing so all along. 
10 “Designated uses” are defined as “those uses specified in water quality standards for each water body or segment whether or 
not they are being attained.” 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(f). “Existing uses” are defined as “those uses actually attained in the water 
body on or after November 28, 1975, whether or not they are included in the water quality standards.” Id. § 131.3(e) (emphasis 
added).  
11 As suggested in the preamble, this is underinclusive of the water bodies in which tribal reserved rights may apply and 
require WQS adjustments since water pollution and depressed populations of tribal resources may have prevented tribal use of 
a water body in which a tribe continues to have rights. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,370 (“EPA anticipates that the circumstances where 
WQS may need to be adjusted to protect tribal reserved rights would fall primarily into two categories: . . . 2. Where a reserved 
rights is not already accounted for as a designated or presently attained use for a waterbody, but that waterbody could be 
reasonably be expected to support that right in the future (e.g., if restoration efforts are underway).”). However, in cases where 
tribal reserved rights have been exercised (even if not to their full extent), these provisions of the implementing regulations are 
another action-forcing element to ensure they are included in designated uses and protected by appropriate water quality 
criteria. 
12 To be clear, discussion of “existing uses” in this paragraph is in regard to the action-forcing obligation under EPA’s 
regulations with respect to designated uses, which is separate and apart from the Tier 1 antidegradation protections for 
“existing uses.” The Tier 1 antidegradation policy requires all “[e]xisting instream water uses and the level of water quality 
necessary to protect the existing uses shall be maintained and protected.” 40 C.F.R. § 131.12(a)(1); EPA Water Quality 
Standard Handbook § 4.2 (“Section 131.12(a)(l), or ‘Tier 1,’ protecting ‘existing uses,’ provides the absolute floor of water 
quality in all waters of the United States. This paragraph applies a minimum level of protection to all waters.”); EPA Water 
Quality Standard Handbook § 4.4.2 (“No activity is allowable under the antidegradation policy which would partially or 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 14 of 29 
needs of such sub-categories of uses, for instance, to differentiate between cold water and warm water fisheries.” 
40 C.F.R. § 131.10(c). So, for example, if a water body has been used for both sport and tribal reserved rights 
fishing, a designated use of “fishing” may incorporate both existing uses, but the criteria must be set at protective 
enough levels to protect the tribal reserved fishing right. 40 C.F.R. § 131.11(a)(1) (“States must adopt those water 
quality criteria that protect the designated use. Such criteria must be based on sound scientific rationale and must 
contain sufficient parameters or constituents to protect the designated use. For waters with multiple use 
designations, the criteria shall support the most sensitive use.”). If the Reserved Rights Rule allows a state an 
“option” to use designated uses/criteria or its antidegradation policy, EPA risks causing confusion as to the state’s 
obligations under these regulatory provisions, which the agency does not propose to amend. States therefore should 
revise their designated uses (and accompanying criteria) to reflect the exercise of reserved rights use, in addition to 
protections afforded by antidegradation policies. The Reserved Rights Rule should be clear on this in the preamble, 
response to comments, and regulatory text. Specifically, “and/or” should be changed to “and” in the final 40 C.F.R. 
§ 131.9. 
2. 
State Antidegradation Policies Are Insufficient to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights On 
Their Own. 
 
Antidegradation policies can provide protections for high water quality that has not been degraded or has 
already been achieved, 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,363, but they offer no mandatory protections for enhancing degraded 
water quality to levels that can support the unsuppressed exercise of reserved rights. Consequently, the use of the 
antidegradation policy—even a strong policy—could only help protect tribal reserved rights in a very limited 
subset of waters of any given state. Where there are high quality waters, they should be protected under Tier 3 
already, but certainly they should be afforded that protection wherever tribal reserved rights apply. We therefore 
strongly support the sentiments and goals driving EPA’s statement in the preamble that: “in situations where a 
waterbody’s existing water quality exceeds the levels that protect tribal reserved rights, these options would 
provide a mechanism to maintain high water quality and provide a margin of safety that would afford the water 
body increased resilience to potential future stressors, including climate change. Protecting such high-quality 
waters would potentially be more cost-effective and resource-efficient than investing in long-term restoration or 
remedial actions in the future.” 87 Fed. Reg. 74,371. The Band has been adamant and vocal that it is imperative 
that water of high quality be protected and water with degraded quality be restored. EPA’s statement is consistent 
with the Band’s former objective. Our concern, however, is that the antidegradation policy should not be available 
to states as a sole option for protecting tribal reserved rights in their water quality standards.  
 
For various reasons, the Clean Water Act’s antidegradation requirements have not been used successfully 
to implement the Act’s purpose to “restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the 
Nation’s waters.” 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a). In 2013, EPA stated:  
EPA indicated in its 1998 ANPRM that “on a national scale, antidegradation is not being used as 
effectively as it could be,” a concern that continues today and is echoed by stakeholders who have 
identified antidegradation as an underused component of water quality protection. . . . [T]he EPA 
received substantial feedback from stakeholders that existing CWA antidegradation regulatory 
provisions and related guidance have not been fully successful in ensuring consistent and effective 
implementation of Tier 2 high quality water protections.  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Clarifications, 78 Fed. Reg. 54,518, 54,526 (proposed Sept. 4, 2013) (to be 
codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 131). Similarly, in 1998, EPA explained: 
In sum, EPA’s current thinking is that the antidegradation policy is significantly underused as a 
tool to attain and maintain water quality and plan for and channel important economic and social 
 
completely eliminate any existing use whether or not that use is designated in a State’s water quality standards.”). As discussed 
below, the “absolute floor of water quality” is not sufficient to protect tribal reserved rights. 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 15 of 29 
development that can impact water quality. EPA believes this is especially true for nonpoint source 
run-off. 
Water Quality Standards Regulation, 63 Fed. Reg. 36,742, 36,780 (proposed July 7, 1998). Numerous 
commentators have recognized these issues as well, including problems stemming from overly broad federal 
requirements for states and lack of EPA authority to review designations beyond broad language; ineffective or 
even no classification designations; minimal use of Outstanding National Resource Water designations; lack of 
nonpoint source pollution regulation and thus no nonpoint triggering of antidegradation reviews; and elevation of 
or deference to economic considerations. See, e.g., Katherine A. Zogas, The Clean Water Act’s Antidegradation 
Policy: Has It Been “Dumped”?, 42 J. MARSHALL L. REV. 209, 227-28 (2008) (Attachment 9); John A. 
Chilson, Keeping Clean Waters Clean: Making the Clean Water Act’s Antidegradation Policy Work, 32 U. MICH. 
J.L. REFORM 545, 548, 553-64 (1999) (Attachment 10); Kent Modesitt, Antidegradation: A Lost Cause or the Next 
Cause, 2 U. DENV. WATER L. REV. 189, 220-22 (Spring 1999) (Attachment 11); see also The Antidegradation 
Policy, 2 PUB. NAT. RESOURCES L. § 19:13 (2nd ed.) (“Indeed, the entire antidegradation policy of some states is 
so vague as to be virtually meaningless.”) (Attachment 12). 
The proposed rule’s suggested options and regulatory text do not address these problems but will likely 
exacerbate them as applied to protecting tribal reserved rights. The one provision of proposed regulatory text at 40 
C.F.R. § 131.9(c)(3) is too vague to ensure protection or meaningful review. It does not include the limitations on 
the antidegradation policy described in the preamble of the rule, limitations that would be necessary in order to 
protect tribal reserved rights when applying the antidegradation policy. See 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371 (discussion of 
“Option 1” and “Option 2” for implementing antidegradation requirements to protect tribal reserved rights through 
use of Tier 3 and Tier 2 designations). The preamble’s discussion and suggested alternatives do not offer any solace 
as: 1) the preamble is not enforceable and 2) it itself does not contain any mandatory protective requirements. 
EPA’s decades of experience should make clear that protecting tribal reserved rights cannot be left solely to the 
whims of the states’ antidegradation policies and decisions without firm requirements and guidance. Moreover, it is 
not clear how the sole use of antidegradation policies would help waters that are currently impaired improve water 
quality to allow for the full exercise and enjoyment of reserved rights. Nor is it clear how the use of antidegradation 
policies would protect against harm to reserved rights from nonpoint source discharges. 
To conclude, the agency should modify proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(c)(2) to use “and” instead of “and/or,” 
thus requiring the use of antidegradation policies in addition to protective designated uses and criteria, rather than 
potentially instead of those requirements.13 The agency should also include mandatory and more specific regulatory 
language about how antidegradation policies must be implemented to protect tribal reserved rights, providing 
particular detail and emphasis regarding “Option 1.” 
3. 
EPA Should Utilize Tier 3 for Outstanding National Resource Waters to Protect 
Reserved Rights. 
Notwithstanding our objections to giving states an option to only use its antidegradation policy to protect 
tribal reserved rights and our concern regarding the lack of prescriptive language in the proposed regulatory text 
regarding how to use pertinent aspects of the antidegradation policy in waters with tribal reserved right, the Band 
does see a role for some aspects of antidegradation policies in the protection of tribal reserved rights. In 2021, EPA 
provided notice that it was considering proposing “Assignment of Tier 3 antidegradation protection (i.e., 
requirement to maintain and protect current and future improved water quality) in waters where tribal reserved 
rights apply and where current water quality is sufficient to protect those rights.” Deborah G. Nagle, Notification of 
Consultation and Coordination on Potential Revisions to the Federal Water Quality Standards Regulations to 
 
13 As discussed above, the proposed text at the end of § 131.9(c)(1) “and” combined with the proposed text at the end of 
§ 131.9(c)(2) “and/or”, create ambiguity which of these three provisions will be required and which EPA would allow to be 
optional. The Band believes that § 131.9(c)(1) [designated uses], (c)(2) [criteria], and (c)(3) [antidegradation] should all be 
required or better yet, (c)(3) [antidegradation] should be moved into a separate subsection and include more detailed 
requirements. 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 16 of 29 
Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (June 11, 2021). The Band submitted comments on this notice and explained its 
general support for this proposal. Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments on EPA’s Notification of 
Consultation and Coordination on Potential Revisions to the Federal Water Quality Standards Regulations to 
Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, at 6-7 (Sept. 13, 2021) (Attachment 13). This idea appears akin to “Option 1” 
suggested by EPA in the preamble, 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371, although without any regulatory text implementing the 
option, see id. at 74,378 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(c)(3)). 
Tier 3 protections apply to Outstanding National Resource Waters, which are generally exceptional, 
important, unique, or sensitive ecologically, or offer unique or important recreational uses. Tier 3 protects against 
any permanent degradation to these important waters; only a temporary, short-term, and limited change in the water 
quality of a Tier 3 water is allowed; for example, for construction activities. Given the well-documented 
importance of tribal reserved rights, see id. at 74,363, and EPA’s trust responsibility to protect these rights, see 
Michael S. Regan, Reaffirmation of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s Indian Policy (Sept. 30, 2021), 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-09/oita-21-000-6427.pdf, it is important to ensure these waters 
are maintained and protected. The Band believes that high quality waters with reserved rights are a good fit for 
protection as Outstanding National Resource Waters and supports EPA’s proposed Option 1, subject to the other 
comments and qualifications in these comments. EPA should operationalize this option with strong regulatory 
language rather than merely describing the option in the preamble. 
Given the well-documented history of minimal ONRW designation, see, e.g., John A. Chilson, Keeping 
Clean Waters Clean: Making the Clean Water Act’s Antidegradation Policy Work, 32 U. MICH. J.L. REFORM 545, 
547 (1999) (Attachment 10), relying on the states to designate ONRWs is insufficient. EPA should set up a process 
by which tribes can directly nominate to EPA high quality waters in areas where they hold reserved rights to be 
designated as ONRWs. That way, EPA can ensure that tribal nominations are given full consideration and not lost 
in the state process. 
4. 
Without Stronger Language, Tier 2 Is Insufficient to Protect Reserved Rights. 
The Band is concerned about the suggested “Option 2,” which would let states utilize Tier 2 protections to 
limit the lowering of water quality in high quality waters (that exceed Clean Water Act section 101(a) uses) to 
protect applicable reserved rights. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371 (citing 40 C.F.R. § 131.12(a)(2)). Tier 2 allows lowering 
of water quality “only in a few extraordinary circumstances where the economic and social need for the activity 
clearly outweighs the benefit of maintaining water quality above that required for ‘fishable/swimmable’ water, and 
both cannot be achieved.” EPA, Water Quality Standards Handbook, Chapter 4: Antidegradation, at 9 (2012). 
Specifically, EPA describes Option 2 as: “States could amend their antidegradation policy and/or other legally 
binding procedures to include a provision that ensures that any lowering of water quality in a high-quality water 
that is authorized by the state, in accordance with 40 CFR 131.12(a)(2), results in water quality that continues to 
protect applicable reserved rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,271.  
To begin, the Band assumes that EPA intends for Tier 2 to be used only where water quality exceeds the 
quality necessary for the full unsuppressed use of reserved rights, and not just Clean Water Act section 101(a) 
designated uses. However, that is not clear from the proposed language and preamble, so should be clarified. And 
the Band notes, as explained above, that this option would not help waters whose quality is below the level 
necessary for the unsuppressed use of reserved rights. 
Fundamentally, the Band is concerned with how even the best-intentioned states might weigh important 
economic or social development in the area against maintaining high water quality that protects tribal reserved 
rights. If given the option, we are not confident that the reserved rights sacred to a tribe would prove more 
consequential to the state than other policy goals it must weigh, at least not consistently. And as explained above, 
without specific regulatory language, it is not clear how Option 2 would actually be implemented or enforced to 
ensure a thumb on the scale in favor of tribal reserved rights. The bottom line is that EPA would need to include 
strong mandatory language in the regulatory text itself if this is offered as a potential measure of protection to 
states. And it should not be available as a sole measure of protection. 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 17 of 29 
Tier 2’s exceptions allowing some level of water quality degradation of a high-quality water based on 
economic and social considerations are distressing where reserved rights are at issue. Water contamination 
threatens traditional Indian lifeways, including longstanding traditions of fishing and fish consumption that are 
central to many tribes’ cultural identity and that make individual tribes distinct as people. Further, many tribes are 
connected to particular waters for cultural, spiritual, or other reasons (and others’ fishing rights are limited to 
certain grounds by treaty), so tribal members cannot simply move their fishing to another location to avoid 
contamination or lowered water quality. The benefits of protecting high water quality to tribes in terms of public 
health, environmental, cultural, and other gains are difficult, and in many cases impossible, to monetize or quantify. 
EPA has correctly recognized that “cultural impacts to tribes and the furtherance of the United States’ treaty 
obligations to tribes—are an example of the type of societal value that cannot be monetized.”14 Supplemental 
Finding That It Is Appropriate and Necessary To Regulate Hazardous Air Pollutants  From Coal- and Oil-Fired 
Electric Utility Steam Generating Units, 81 Fed. Reg. 24,420, 24,429 n.18 (April 25, 2016); see also 87 Fed. Reg. 
at 74,374 (qualitatively describing variety of unique benefits from proposed rule). Most of the benefits from high 
water quality to tribal health, subsistence, fishing rights, and cultural identity defy full calculation. See, e.g., Cass 
R. Sunstein, The Limits of Quantification, 102 CALIF. L. REV. 1369, 1380-85 (2014) (Attachment 15); United 
States v. Washington, 384 F. Supp. 312, 404 (W.D. Wash. 1974) (“[T]he treaty rights . . . are unique and the 
damages which have been or will be sustained are not susceptible of definite monetary determination.”); see also 
2019 NCAI et al. Comments on MATS Rule Reconsideration of Supplemental Finding and Residual Risk at 10-13 
(Attachment 16). States, with their own objectives, are unlikely to want—or even be able—to successfully evaluate 
a tribal member’s ability to continue to engage in the fishing culture practiced since time immemorial by her 
ancestors, and to pass those traditions on to her children. But that does not mean that these core values can be 
excluded when weighing whether lowering water quality is necessary to accommodate important economic or 
social development or choosing from a range of practicable alternatives that would prevent or lessen the 
degradation.15  
Because of this problem, the Band does not support the use of Tier 2, at least as the sole protective 
measure, for tribal reserved rights. Should EPA move forward with utilizing Tier 2 as an option in combination 
with other requirements, EPA should incorporate additional language that assures these important tribal interests 
 
14 Even economists that have attempted to place a value on subsistence fishing have acknowledged that such valuation cannot 
capture the social and cultural aspects of subsistence fishing. For instance, while taking no position on the accuracy of the 
analysis, we note the Army Corps of Engineers stated: 
It is recognized that the household decision to participate in subsistence activities has a number of 
components beyond the provision of food. There are also social elements to subsistence, including education 
and cultural elements, the expression of ethics and values, tribal identity, spirituality and ideology, and 
traditional knowledge and language, in addition to health benefits. . . . [I]t is not possible to determine how 
much of the total valuation of subsistence activity comes from the provision of food, and how much comes 
from the expression of social and cultural values. Production cost is, therefore, only a partial proxy for total 
subsistence value, and does not measure the social and cultural aspects of subsistence. 
U.S. Army Corps Engineers, Great Lakes and Mississippi River Interbasin Study Team, Treaty Rights and Subsistence Fishing 
in the U.S. Waters of the Great Lakes, Upper Mississippi River, and Ohio River Basins (June 2012) at 61, available at 
https://glmris.anl.gov/documents/docs/Subsistence_Fishing_Report.pdf (Attachment 14). 
15 We note that even EPA has had difficulty with the concept of taking qualitative benefits properly into account when engaged 
in economic analyses during certain administrations. EPA recently acknowledged this failing itself. See EPA, National 
Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Coal- and Oil-Fired Electric Utility Steam Generating Units – Revocation of 
the 2020 Reconsideration, and Affirmation of the Appropriate and Necessary Supplemental Finding (pre-publication version) 
at 86, available at https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-
02/6716.2_MATS%20A_N_Final%20Rule_20230213_SPPD.admin__0.pdf (“The decision framework in the 2020 Final 
Action, however, did not give ‘less weight’ to these factors – it effectively gave them none.”). Given even the federal Trustee’s 
track record with these types of issues, relying on states to protect tribal reserved rights using Tier 2 protections provides little 
comfort. 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 18 of 29 
are prioritized to assure they are properly accounted for and protected. EPA and states should recognize that a 
state’s evaluation must begin from a balance favoring protecting water quality and reserved rights that otherwise 
may not get captured in the state’s economic balancing. 
B. 
Description of Definition of “Tribal Reserved Rights” Is Underinclusive. 
EPA requested comment on whether additional types of reserved rights should be included beyond fishing, 
gathering of aquatic plants, and hunting for aquatic dependent animals in its definition of “tribal reserved rights.” 
See 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,367 (“Examples of tribal reserved rights as defined in this proposed rulemaking include but 
are not limited to the rights to fish; gather aquatic plants; and to hunt for aquatic-dependent animals. EPA requests 
comment on whether there are additional types of tribal reserved rights that it should consider.”). The answer is 
yes. While tribal reserved rights certainly extend to each of the already enumerated rights, tribes reserved more 
water-dependent rights than those specifically listed in the Federal Register notice. While the actual language 
proposed for the definition at 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(r) would encompass these rights, the supporting materials—
including the preamble to the final rule and the response to comments—should include a more comprehensive list 
of rights covered by the rule. EPA should also make clear that this definition of “tribal reserved rights” applies only 
to this rule as tribes have other reserved rights that extend beyond aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources. 
Ultimately, it may not be possible for all types of aquatic and aquatic-dependent tribal reserved rights to be 
explicitly highlighted in this administrative record, but common ones should be and EPA should make clear that 
just because a right has not been listed in the preamble or response to comments does not mean that it is not 
covered by the rule.  
Many tribes engage in water-dependent ceremonies and cultural events in which tribal members come into 
direct contact with water, such as during canoe journeys, boat dances, sweat lodges, bathing, and in-water 
ceremonies. Poor water quality can directly affect those ceremonies and cultural events. As described in Section I, 
the Band’s members engage in various water-based ceremonies like this. One example is the sweat lodges that 
Maliseets hold to heal and honor the spirit, in which they rely on water from the river, which is poured on heated 
stones to generate steam. Uses like this must be protected by the Reserved Rights Rule. 
Tribes across the country also have reserved water rights that must be protected. In Winters v. United 
States, the Supreme Court recognized that when land has been reserved to a tribe, a reservation of water sufficient 
to meet the purposes of the reservation is implied. 207 U.S. 564, 576-77 (1908); see also, e.g., Cappeart v. United 
States, 426 U.S. 128, 139 (1976); Arizona v. California, 373 U.S. 546, 597-602 (1963); Agua Caliente Band of 
Cahuilla Indians v. Coachella Valley Water Dist., 849 F.3d 1262, 1270 (9th Cir. 2017) (“[T]he primary purpose 
underlying the establishment of the reservation was to create a home for the Tribe, and water was necessarily 
implicated in that purpose.”). In many cases, the water reserved by a tribe originates outside of its reservation and 
flows downstream to the reservation. The Winters reserved water right entitles the tribe to a quantity of water 
sufficient to meet the purposes of the reservation, but the water must also be of sufficient quality to meet the 
purposes. Cohen’s Handbook of Federal Indian Law—the seminal treatise in the field—states as follows:  
To meet federal purposes, Indian reserved water rights should be protected against . . . impairments 
of water quality, as well as against diminutions in quantity. . . . Fulfilling the purposes of Indian 
reservations depends on the tribes receiving water of adequate quality as well as sufficient 
quantity. . . . The quality of the water necessary for [tribal] uses may vary from the high quality 
needed for human consumption to a lesser quality for fish and wildlife habitat to an even lower 
quality for irrigation. Each use, however, requires water that is appropriate quality to support that 
use.  
The quality and quantity of water may be directly related. This interrelationship is most evident in 
the case of a reserved right to water for fisheries preservation. The right reserved is that amount of 
water necessary to maintain the fishery. The fishery consists not only of the fish themselves, but 
also of the conditions necessary to their survival. Thus, habitat protection is an integral component 
of the reserved right. In order to protect the fishery habitat, tribes should have a right not only to a 
sufficient amount of water, but also to water that is of adequate quality. 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 19 of 29 
COHEN’S HANDBOOK OF FEDERAL INDIAN LAW § 19.03[9], at 1236 (Nell Jessup Newton ed., 2012) (footnotes and 
citations omitted). In the Federal Register notice, EPA indicates that “[t]ribal reserved rights as defined in this 
proposed rulemaking generally do not address the quantification of Winters rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,363. 
However, as noted above, the quality and quantity of water may be directly related. For instance, for a tribe with a 
Winters reserved water right that requires water sufficient to support fishing on a reservation, what happens 
upstream of the reservation with respect to water quantity may diminish water quality both outside and within the 
reservation. A good example is temperature impacts from upstream diversions. A stream may become water quality 
impaired for temperature if too much water has been diverted from the stream; in turn, this may affect fish 
dependent on cold water both outside and within the tribe’s reservation. This is an increasingly important issue in 
light of increased pressures from climate change, as EPA generally acknowledges. See 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,366. In 
that case, the “tribal reserved right” in this rule should include the Tribe’s Winters reserved water right to protect 
the water quality before it reaches the reservation, even if the quantity of water is also implicated. Moreover, 
sometimes protection of the Winters reserved water right will have nothing to do with quantity. For instance, if a 
tribe has a Winters reserved water right for economic development, drinking water, or some other purpose, an 
upstream state must protect the water quality required to meet each such use before the water to which the tribe is 
entitled reaches the reservation, which may include more protective criteria to preventing pollutants from being 
discharged upstream of the reservation that would impair the Winters right.16  
At proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(r), the rule defines “tribal reserved rights” as “any rights to aquatic and/or 
aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, 
executive orders, or other sources of Federal law.” This language is broad enough to encompass ceremonial uses 
and Winters reserved water rights, as it must. However, EPA’s decision not to include “water” itself among the list 
of enumerated examples of tribal reserved rights (87 Fed. Reg. at 74,367) and its statement that the definition 
generally does not include quantification of Winters rights (87 Fed. Reg. at 74,363) could be used to suggest that 
Winters rights need not be protected under the rule. This cannot be, and the preamble and response to comments for 
the final rule must make it clear that the water quality needed for Winters reserved water rights to fulfill the 
purposes of a reservation must be maintained or achieved. The same is true for ceremonial uses of water wherever 
tribes reserved such rights in areas where states or EPA may promulgate water quality standards. 
In EPA’s description of the “tribal reserved rights” definition, the agency notes that the proposed definition 
“does not apply to unratified treaties or reserved rights that have been abrogated or otherwise superseded.” 87 Fed. 
Reg. at 74,366. The Band does not take exception to this language but note for the record that many states do not 
seem to understand or accept that only Congress has the authority to abrogate a reserved right and that any such 
abrogation must be explicit. E.g., United States v. Dion, 476 U.S. 734, 738-39 (1986) (“We have required that 
Congress’ intention to abrogate Indian treaty rights be clear and plain.”); Washington v. Wash. Com. Passenger 
Fishing Vessel Ass’n, 443 U.S. 658, 690 (1979) (“Absent explicit statutory language, we have been extremely 
reluctant to find congressional abrogation of treaty rights. . . .”). While some states may wish that treaties or other 
sources of reserved rights did not exist or claim that circumstances have changed such that the reserved rights have 
been relinquished, EPA, in coordination with affected rights holders, will need to ensure that such erroneous 
positions are provided no credence.17 If a state asserts abrogation of a tribal reserved right as a basis for not 
 
16 Similar arguments can be made that some waters outside of the waters in which a tribe might hold its reserved fishing rights 
may still require more protective WQS to protect tribal reserved rights where such waters are necessary to support the right. 
For instance, the life cycle of fish may include the fish spending time in habitat outside of areas in which a tribe holds reserved 
rights. However, that habitat should still be sufficiently protective so as not to undermine the tribal reserved right once the fish 
(or population of fish) enters or returns to an area in which the tribe holds the right. 
17 In the preamble, EPA posits a question regarding whether in a situation in which “a waterbody may not be able to support a 
reserved right to an aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resource because attaining that use in that waterbody is not currently 
feasible,” the state could revise its designated uses to remove the tribal reserved rights use following a use attainability 
analysis. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,372. We do not believe either EPA or the state would have that option. While such an 
administrative action would have no legal bearing on the tribe’s reserved rights, Clean Water Act actions should not be taken 
that suggest a right no longer exists or create confusion for the public in that regard. Instead, the CWA should only be 
“[striving] for attainment of such uses to protect a tribal reserved right consistent with the obligations of treaties and other 
Federal Laws.” Id. Further, where some level of reserved right use, even if severely suppressed, is being attained, the state 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 20 of 29 
protecting it in its water quality standards, the burden must be on the state to provide explicit, clear, and plain 
Congressional authority supporting its position rather than shifting the burden to the tribe to prove that there is no 
such authority.  
C. 
The “Right Holder” Definition Is Acceptable But Its Use Does Not Make Sense at One Point 
in the Proposed Regulatory Language. 
EPA proposes to define “right holders” at 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(s) as “tribes holding rights to aquatic and/or 
aquatic-dependent resources pursuant to an applicable treaty, statute, executive order, or other source of Federal 
law.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,366, 74,378. The Band does not object to this definition but notes that use of the term 
“right holder” does not make sense in at least one circumstance in which it has been used in the regulatory scheme. 
At 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(2), the proposed language states that WQS must be established to protect “[t]he health of 
the right holders to at least the same risk level as provided to the general population of the State.” It would be better 
to use another term besides “right holders” in this instance since EPA presumably means individual tribal members 
rather than a tribe in this provision. A phrase such as “right holder’s members” or “right holder’s population” could 
be substituted in this provision. In other instances, such as the information sharing provision at 40 C.F.R. § 
131.6(g)(1) and the tribal consultation provision at 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(b), the use of the term “right holders” makes 
sense as these activities would involve the affected tribe. The Band also notes that the definition of “right holders” 
could be shortened to: “tribes holding tribal reserved rights,” assuming the agency does not make any changes to 
the definition of “tribal reserved rights” proposed for 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(r). As it stands now, the language in 40 
C.F.R. § 131.3(s) is somewhat redundant to the definition at § 131.3(r). 
D. 
The Types of Historic Information to Determine the Level of Water Quality Necessary to 
Protect Tribal Reserved Rights Should Include Indigenous Traditional Ecological 
Knowledge, and Funding Should Be Provided to Ensure Sufficient Data and Information Is 
Available to Support Protective WQS.  
EPA has requested comment on the types of information that states and EPA should consider in 
determining the level of water quality necessary to protect tribal reserved rights. EPA writes:  
Determining the level of water quality necessary to protect any aquatic or aquatic-dependent 
resource or users of that resource can be a complex endeavor that involves weighing multiple lines 
of evidence. However, this endeavor will largely mirror the process states already follow in 
developing their WQS. Examples of such evidence include fish consumption rate surveys, studies 
or accounts of heritage fish consumption rates, peer-reviewed articles or reports on the types and 
levels of pollutants that can adversely affect the resource in question, and monitoring data 
reflecting historic and/or current water quality. EPA requests comment on the types of historic 
information that states and EPA should consider. 
87 Fed. Reg. at 74,368 (emphasis added). The Band agrees that each of these categories of information is an 
appropriate type of information for states and EPA to consider in determining the level of water quality necessary 
to protect tribal reserved rights (i.e., in setting criteria). In addition, however, we emphasize the need for states and 
EPA to consider Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge (ITEK) in their development of water quality 
 
would have no authority to remove that existing use under EPA’s existing implementing regulations. 40 C.F.R. §131.10(g) 
(“States may designate a use, or remove a use that is not an existing use, if the State conducts a use attainability analysis . . . 
.”). In short, if a tribe has reserved rights in a water body in which a state has jurisdiction to set WQS, that reserved right 
should be a designated use, and EPA should afford the state no opportunity or authority to remove that designated use unless 
and until Congress explicitly and plainly abrogates that right. In extremely limited circumstances, a WQS variance that 
conforms to the requirements in 40 C.F.R. § 131.14 may be available. However, as EPA is well aware, “[w]here a State adopts 
a WQS variance, the State must retain, in its standards, the underlying designated use and criterion addressed by the WQS 
variance.” 40 C.F.R. § 131.14(a)(2). Any such variance would need to be approved by EPA after consultation with right 
holders. As the tribes’ trustee, we expect that EPA would adhere to the right holder’s position on the variance. 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 21 of 29 
standards. Further, some level of funding must be made available by the federal government to ensure that the 
requirement in proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a) indicating that states and EPA must rely on “available data and 
information” to establish WQS that protect 1) the exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or 
aquatic-dependent resource availability and 2) tribal member health can be fulfilled. Otherwise, there is a risk that 
relevant information may not be readily available, which may derail urgently needed improvements in water 
quality. 
 
 
1. 
Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge (ITEK) 
On November 15, 2021, the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) and the White 
House Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) jointly released a memorandum that commits to elevating 
Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge (ITEK) in federal scientific policy processes. Office of Science and 
Technology Policy, Council on Environmental Quality Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Federal 
Decision Making (Nov. 15, 2021) [2021 White House Memorandum], available at 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/111521-OSTP-CEQ-ITEK-Memo.pdf. This 
memorandum formally recognized ITEK as one of many bodies of knowledge that are valuable to improving 
policy making and recognizes that its inclusion in federal policy making is “[c]onsistent with the Administration’s 
additional commitment to scientific integrity and knowledge and evidence-based policymaking.” Id. at 1. On 
November 30, 2022, the White House followed up on this memorandum with “Guidance for Federal Departments 
and Agencies on Indigenous Knowledge” (https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/OSTP-CEQ-
IK-Guidance.pdf) and an associated memorandum on “Implementation of Guidance for Federal Departments and 
Agencies on Indigenous Knowledge” (https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/IK-Guidance-
Implementation-Memo.pdf). These documents are “intended to promote and enable a government-wide effort to 
improve the recognition and inclusion of Indigenous Knowledge” in “research, policy, and other decision making,” 
including review and approval of state water quality standards. Nov. 30, 2022 Implementation of Guidance 
Memorandum at 1; see also November 30, 2022 Guidance Memorandum at 4-5 (“Indigenous Knowledge can 
provide accurate information, valuable insights, and effective practices that complement practices and knowledge 
derived from other approaches. For example, at times Indigenous Knowledge holders have observed early and 
accurate detection of environmental changes, such as interconnected patterns of species, signs of drought, or 
impacted water quality.”). 
The 2021 White House Memorandum defined “ITEK [as] a body of observations, oral and written 
knowledge, practices, and beliefs that promote environmental sustainability and the responsible stewardship of 
natural resources through relationships between humans and environmental systems.” Id. at 2. As far as we are 
aware, EPA has not yet adopted its own definition of ITEK, but it has employed the U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service’s 
definition in prior guidance: 
Also called by other names including Indigenous Knowledge or Native Science, (hereafter, TEK) 
refers to the evolving knowledge acquired by indigenous and local peoples over hundreds or 
thousands of years through direct contact with the environment. This knowledge is specific to a 
location and includes the relationships between plants, animals, natural phenomena, landscapes 
and timing of events that are used for lifeways, including but not limited to hunting, fishing, 
trapping, agriculture, and forestry. TEK is an accumulating body of knowledge, practice, and 
belief, evolving by adaptive processes and handed down through generations by cultural 
transmission, about the relationship of living beings (human and non-human) with one another and 
with the environment. It encompasses the world view of indigenous people which includes 
ecology, spirituality, human and animal relationships, and more. 
EPA Re: “Considering Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) During the Cleanup Process (Jan. 3, 2017), 
available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-
10/documents/considering_traditional_ecological_knowledge_tek_during_the_cleanup_process_updated_link.pdf 
(quoting Sarah Rinkevich et al., Traditional Ecological Knowledge for Application by Service Scientists Fact Sheet, 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Native American Program. (Feb. 2011)). As suggested by the definitions above, 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 22 of 29 
“ITEK” has been identified with several names, including “Traditional Ecological Knowledge” (TEK) and 
“Indigenous Knowledge,” but all retain a common theme: Indigenous knowledge systems are based on intense, 
place-based observations that have evolved, and continue to evolve, over millennia. Indigenous knowledge 
survives and adapts as it is passed from one generation to the next through the exercise of cultural practices.  
Increasingly, non-Indigenous scientists and policy makers recognize the importance of ITEK in decision-
making, including the connections it demonstrates between biological, physical, cultural, and spiritual systems. The 
White House recognizes ITEK “as one of the many important bodies of knowledge that contributes to the 
scientific, technical, social, and economic advancements of the United States and to our collective understanding of 
the natural world.” 2021 White House Memorandum at 1. Likewise, EPA’s 2014 Policy on Environmental Justice 
for Working with Federally Recognized Tribes and Indigenous People 
(https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2017-10/documents/ej-indigenous-policy.pdf), “encourages as appropriate 
and to the extent practicable and permitted by law, the integration of Traditional Ecological Knowledge into the 
agency’s environmental science, and policy decision-making processes to address environmental justice concerns 
and facilitate program implementation.” Id. at 3. Certainly, ITEK must be considered in determining the level of 
water quality necessary to protect “tribal reserved rights” under the rule.  
 
EPA must be mindful that tribes may have confidentiality concerns with respect to ITEK and other types of 
tribal history and knowledge. As EPA acknowledged in its 2014 Environmental Justice Policy (page 3), “The EPA 
considers confidentiality concerns regarding information on sacred sites, cultural resources, and other traditional 
knowledge, as permitted by law. The EPA acknowledges that unique situations and relationships may exist in 
regard to sacred sites.” Before seeking ITEK from “right holders,” EPA should, at a minimum, observe the cautions 
laid out in the Nov. 30, 2022 White House Guidance (pages 15-16) regarding conducting an initial meeting, so that 
ITEK holders are aware of how the information will be used and the extent to which it can be made available to 
states or the public at large. Likewise, it should provide guidance and a process for states to use in handling such 
information. 
 
 
2.  
Federal Funding 
Ensuring that the type of information necessary to meet the requirements of proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a) 
(“to the extent supported by available data and information”) takes resources. It is not cheap or easy to complete 
things like fish consumption surveys, toxicology studies, interviews with tribal elders to record ITEK and oral 
histories, etc. Both tribes and states are likely to require resources in order to ensure that the information EPA is 
calling for is available and does not present an unintended barrier to promulgation and approval of WQS that 
actually protect tribal reserved rights. A good example of the type of study that could inform unsuppressed levels of 
fish consumption is the Wabanaki Traditional Cultural Lifeways Exposure Pathway Scenario (July 2009), 
available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-08/documents/ditca.pdf (Attachment 17). The Wabanaki 
study was funded by EPA through a Direct Implementation Tribal Cooperative Agreement, peer-reviewed, and 
specifically designed for use in reviewing and developing water quality standards. It provides a numerical 
representation of the environmental contact, diet, and exposure pathways of people fully using natural resources 
and pursuing traditional cultural lifeways. Wabanaki Study at 7-10; see also 81 Fed. Reg. 23,239, 23,246 (April 20, 
2016) (quoting purpose of study as “to describe the lifestyle that was universal when resources were in better 
condition and that some tribal members practice today (and many more that are waiting to resume once restoration 
goals and protective standards are in place)”). The study breaks down consumption levels based on the estimated 
range of diets that reflect three traditional lifestyle modes reflective of different habitat types. Another good 
example of this type of EPA-tribal funding partnership is the fish consumption survey completed for the Columbia 
Basin Treaty Tribes by the Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission (CRITFC), which was a project funded 
through a cooperative agreement between CRITFC and the EPA’s Office of Policy, Planning and Evaluation. 
CRITFC, A Fish Consumption Survey of the Umatilla, Nez Perce, Yakama, and Warm Springs Tribes of the 
Columbia River Basin: Technical Report 94-3 (Oct. 1994), available at https://www.critfc.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/06/94-3report.pdf (Attachment 18). We request that EPA discuss in its response to comments 
how the agency intends and plans to ensure that federal funding is available to help tribes gather or develop the 
information necessary to ensure rapid progress on WQS improvements is not thwarted by a lack of available 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 23 of 29 
information. Further, EPA should ensure that it does not set too onerous a threshold for the data and information 
required to meet the language of 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a) (“available data and information”) in either practice or 
guidance documents that would prevent improvements on a prompt timeline. 
E. 
EPA Is Correct to Account for Suppression Effects Explicitly in the Language of the 
Proposed Rule.  
The Band wholeheartedly agrees with EPA that the WQS must be set to protect the exercise of tribal 
reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or the availability of the resource at issue. Without such a provision, 
water quality standards will only protect the unsatisfactory status quo in which tribal members consume fish at 
rates far below heritage rates of consumption when fish were more abundant and tribal members did not need to be 
fearful of eating too much seafood due to toxic contamination. This is the present circumstance in the Band’s 
waters. In 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a), EPA proposes the following language:  
(a) Water quality standards must protect tribal reserved rights applicable to waters subject to such 
standards. To protect tribal reserved rights, water quality standards must, to the extent supported by 
available data and information, be established to protect: 
(1) The exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the 
aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource; and 
(2) The health of the right holders to at least the same risk level as provided to the general 
population of the State. 
87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378. We believe this proposed regulatory language does a good job of pointing out—and 
requiring states to address—the problem of suppression, both in terms of the effects of depressed supplies of 
aquatic resources resulting from degraded water quality and the effects of contamination on tribal member health. 
“EPA request[ed] comment on whether additional language should be included in the final rule specifying the 
considerations for determining unsuppressed WQS.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,369. While the Band does not have specific 
suggestions for more detail in the proposed regulatory language itself, we do believe it will be incumbent upon 
EPA to ensure its guidance documents, including documents such EPA’s Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water 
Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human Health (2000), are updated to be consistent with the CWA’s 
implementing regulations. Moreover, specific guidance documents may be required to implement this new rule, 
and consistent application of this provision may benefit especially from such guidance. 
 
Related to tribal reserved fishing rights, the National Environmental Justice Council (NEJAC) explains: “A 
‘suppression effect’ occurs when a fish consumption rate (FCR) for a given population, group, or tribe reflects a 
current level of consumption that is artificially diminished from an appropriate baseline level of consumption for 
that population, group, or tribe. The more robust baseline level of consumption is suppressed, inasmuch as it does 
not get captured by the FCR.” NEJAC, Fish Consumption and Environmental Justice, at 43-45 (Nov. 2002) 
(Attachment 19). The Federal Register notice indicates that EPA is not necessarily proposing to return waterbodies 
to a “condition that existed at the time a reserved right was established, 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,366-67, citing the Grand 
Coulee Dam as the type of condition that revised WQS are not able to fully account for due to the dam’s depletion 
of fish populations available for tribal member consumption. Id. However, “the regulation is intended to result in 
WQS that protect reasonably anticipated future uses, taking into account factors that may have substantially altered 
a water body,” id. at 74,367. The Federal Register notice also notes, “the unsuppressed level or use of a resource 
should account for situations where restoration efforts are planned or underway (e.g., efforts to improve habitat or 
reduce contamination), such that it would be reasonable to expect the opportunities for use of the resource to 
increase in the future.” Id. at 74,369. While we agree with this latter sentiment, EPA must not allow legacy 
pollution and levels of pollution to be locked in place just because there is long-standing infrastructure or industrial 
use that has depleted the quality of water in a water body. Dams come down (just look at the Kennebec and 
Penobscot rivers) and legacy pollution can be cleaned up and habitat restored (see the Morningstar Road culvert 
replacement project on Moose Brook), so we are discomforted by the idea that historic wrongs may be built into a 
diminished baseline from which the level of protection necessary for the tribal reserved right WQS will be 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 24 of 29 
assessed. As the agency acknowledges, EPA should be forcing action rather than reinforcing an existing suppressed 
use or “set[ting] in motion a ‘downward spiral’ of further reduction/suppression.” Id. at 74,369. As a trustee with 
fiduciary obligations to the tribes, EPA must apply its authority to prompt restoration, not maintain the status quo. 
EPA notes that determining levels for the unsuppressed exercise of tribal reserved rights would need to be 
based on “available data and information” without specifying what types of data and information states or EPA 
may rely on. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378. In an earlier section, we note the types of information that might be used, but 
we do want to make clear that this proposal calls for caution. For example, as described above, contemporary fish 
consumption surveys may indicate lower rates of fish consumption than historic levels or the levels to which those 
exercising reserved rights are entitled. Consequently, as suggested above, EPA should include language in the rule, 
preamble, response to comments, and guidance documents that would require states and EPA to rely on available 
ITEK, other tribal accounts of unsuppressed rates, historical or anthropological reports of the exercise of tribal 
reserved rights, or studies of the historical exercise of tribal reserved rights, so that WQS do not end up protecting 
only for a suppressed status quo. If these types of information are available, they should supersede other available 
data or information.18 If these types of information are not available at the time of a triennial review, as suggested 
above, EPA should make grants or other funding available for studies of the unsuppressed exercise of tribal 
reserved rights to be completed before the next triennial review, so that suppression effects can be corrected.  
F. 
The Reserved Rights Rule Must Apply Wherever a State Has Jurisdiction to Set WQS in 
Waters in Which a Tribe Holds Reserved Rights. 
It is important to make sure that tribal reserved rights are protected wherever they exist, including any 
place where a state or EPA has jurisdiction to set WQS. As described in detail in Section II.A., the Band holds 
reserved rights, at a minimum, on its trust lands and in its waters, including fishing, hunting, ceremonial, water, and 
other reserved rights. We continue to disagree with EPA’s determination that Maine has the right to set WQS in 
tribal waters, including the waters in and adjacent to the Houlton Band’s trust lands. However, as long as that 
interpretation is in place, EPA must ensure the rule extends to our waters. To avoid any uncertainty or ambiguity 
with respect to the Reserved Rights Rule’s application in Maliseet waters, we ask EPA to avoid the use of an “off-
reservation” shorthand. While the Band understands that the Reserved Rights Rule would most frequently apply to 
waters outside of Indian Country, as you are well aware, EPA’s determination that Maine has authority to set WQS 
within Maliseet waters is authority that other states do not enjoy with respect to the Indian Country within their 
boundaries. We believe the Federal Register notice for the proposed rule was careful to include all waters in which 
states are permitted to promulgate WQS, but we want to ensure that the final rule, preamble, and response to 
comments is equally careful. Using a shorthand like the rule applying “off-reservation” is not fully inclusive of all 
places where the Reserved Rights Rule would apply, and we are concerned that deviation from the careful language 
of the rule could be exploited. 
 
IV. 
TRIBAL CONSULTATION AND PRACTICALITIES OF RULE IMPLEMENTATION 
We conclude with one of our—if not the—greatest concerns about the proposed Reserved Rights Rule. We 
know our reserved rights better than anyone else. We can speak authoritatively to these rights when others cannot. 
 
18 In the Federal Register notice, EPA writes, “Where information is conflicting, there are gaps in information, and/or a 
difference of opinion exists between the state and one or more tribes about the level of water quality necessary to protect a 
reserved right, EPA will take action based on the best available information in the same way that EPA currently makes WQS 
decisions in these circumstances in other contexts, e.g., determining whether criteria are scientifically defensible in situations 
where there is conflicting science, there are gaps in the science, and/or there are different conclusions among stakeholders. 
EPA requests comment on whether there are other factors it should consider when making decisions under these 
circumstances.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371. We do not generally have a concern about this approach, except that where there is 
conflicting information about which a tribe would know more than a state (e.g., the existence and level of use of the tribe’s 
own reserved rights) or where there is “a difference of opinion . . . between [a] state and one or more tribes about the level of 
water quality necessary to protect a reserved right,” EPA should defer to, or at least weigh more heavily, the tribal position in 
that circumstance. The failure to do so may run afoul of EPA’s trust responsibility and obligations under the Clean Water Act 
and federal Indian law to ensure that tribal reserved rights are protected. 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 25 of 29 
While we deeply appreciate EPA’s efforts through this proposed rule to protect our reserved rights, the proposed 
rule is flawed in the process it describes for determining if and where tribal reserved rights apply, and with whom it 
places that power. The rule must be corrected on this score before it is finalized. 
 
The proposed rule requires that EPA consult with tribes (“right holders”) in association with the agency’s 
review of a state’s water quality standards. The proposed language at 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(b) states, “In reviewing 
State water quality standards submissions under this section, EPA will initiate tribal consultation with the right 
holders, consistent with applicable EPA tribal consultation policies, in determining whether State water quality 
standards protect applicable tribal reserved rights in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74,378. The Band appreciates this commitment to tribal consultation in EPA’s review of the standards a state 
submits for approval and we want to see this explicit commitment to consultation in the final rule (and other rules 
EPA is promulgating). However, we are concerned that the tribal consultation described in the regulatory language 
itself comes too late in the process if it only occurs after a state has already gone through its rulemaking process 
and submitted such standards to EPA for approval. If a state does not have and use the requisite information from 
affected tribes much earlier in the process, this could result in costly, lengthy delays that could have been avoided 
had an affected tribe been consulted earlier, as well as the state being less inclined to willingly incorporate tribal 
information after it has already completed its administrative process. Consequently, we believe that the affirmative 
duty for EPA to consult should be maintained in the final language of the rule, but it should be expanded to require 
early (and frequent) consultation with the right holders. We understand from EPA’s preamble and from 
government-to-government consultation that EPA appreciates the need for early and frequent consultation with 
tribes and to provide direction and guidance to states, but that understanding should be made a requirement in the 
regulatory text. Compare 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,372 (“EPA makes itself available to engage early and often to provide 
support when states are adopting and revising WQS. . . . EPA intends to support states by providing input and 
information on any tribal reserved rights and the level of water quality to protect those rights. As previously 
mentioned, EPA is also available to facilitate dialogue between states and tribes.”), with 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378 
(proposed § 131.9(b) requiring no early consultation with tribes or states), and id. (proposed § 131.20 describing 
state review and triennial review with no reference to consultation with EPA or tribes). 
 
The language at 40 C.F.R. § 131.6(g)(1) in which EPA proposes the following language regarding the 
minimum requirements for a state’s water quality standards submission does not assuage the concern: 
Where applicable, information which will aid the agency in evaluating whether the submission 
protects tribal reserved rights consistent with § 131.9, including: 
(1) Information about the scope, nature, and current and past use of the tribal reserved rights, as 
informed by the right holders; and 
(2) Data and methods used to develop the water quality standards. 
87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378 (emphasis added). In fact, it causes us quite a bit of consternation, as does the process 
described (but not required) in the preamble at pages 74,367-68. Most fundamentally, the italicized phrase is too 
vague regarding tribes’ role and does not require the state to actually use the information provided by tribes 
regarding their own reserved rights. We are very concerned that states—which frequently have the least incentive 
to recognize tribal reserved rights and are frequently outright hostile to such rights—will be opining on the 
existence, scope, nature, and current and past use of tribes’ most sacred rights without being required to accept the 
affected tribe’s or even the federal trustee’s description and assessment of these rights. We understand that states 
with delegated Clean Water Act authority over waters in which tribes hold reserved rights must have some role in 
developing the WQS to protect that use of waters over which they have jurisdiction. However, we do not believe 
that states can or should be in the driver’s seat with respect to the analysis of the topics included in proposed 40 
C.F.R. § 131.6(g)(1). While certainly not true of all states, in enough, it will put the fox in charge of the hen house, 
such that this provision is not workable from our perspective. Instead, the federal trustee, after working closely 
with an affected tribe (and the Department of Interior, if needed), must take a much more active—and binding—
role in this process in order to ensure that tribes’ sovereign interests and sacred rights are protected. Once the tribal 
reserved rights are appropriately characterized by the appropriate actors (the tribe, first and foremost), at that point, 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 26 of 29 
we could see states properly exercising their delegated authority to set designated uses, criteria, and antidegradation 
policy. We request that the final language of the rule reflect these comments through more detailed and binding 
regulatory provisions that put tribes in charge of characterizing their own rights. At the very least, the language of 
40 C.F.R. § 131.6(g)(1) should be stripped down to its bare minimum, so that states (as opposed to tribes or EPA) 
are not charged with characterizing the “scope, nature, and current and past use of tribal reserved rights.” Changing 
that provision to “(1) Information about tribal reserved rights, as provided by the right holders” would provide us 
considerably more comfort about how the process might work and what its ultimate outcome might be.19 
Even if we could abide the placement of authority to assess tribal reserved rights in states’ hands (which 
we cannot), the proposed regulatory language is not prescriptive enough about what a state must do to ensure that it 
has appropriate information from a tribe—or that it uses it. In theory, the “as informed by the right holders” 
language above would suggest to a state that it should engage in government-to-government consultation with 
tribes holding tribal reserved rights in order to ensure it has sufficient information about the existence, scope, 
nature, and current and past use of tribal reserved rights to know where and how to protect them through the state’s 
WQS. However, without more explicit, mandatory language, we are skeptical that robust consultation with tribes 
will be the outcome of this language in most states, particularly those that do not have an existing government-to-
government consultation policy (or where the policy is underdeveloped or underutilized in practice). As EPA is 
well aware, the relationship between states and tribes can be fraught and very adversarial at times. Even where a 
tribe and a state have a decent, or even a very good, relationship, they may not be able to agree on what level of 
water quality will actually protect the tribal reserved rights. Consequently, we recommend more direct and robust 
regulatory language that explicitly requires states to consult with tribes at the outset of and throughout its revision 
process to determine whether, where, and how tribal reserved rights will be affected by the WQS, as well as 
language that establishes a presumption in favor of the use of a tribe’s own assessment of its rights when EPA 
reviews a state’s WQS submission. In addition to strengthening the proposed regulatory language, the Band 
suggests that EPA prepare guidance explaining how a state should engage in government-to-government 
consultation with a tribe; the value and need to accept Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge as relevant, 
reliable information; and the sensitivities and need for careful handling of some such information and knowledge.  
Other issues that are not accounted for in the regulatory language include: How will EPA protect tribes 
from state analyses of reserved rights that may be unsupported by law, the subject of litigation, or in need of update 
due to new info? How will EPA ensure that the wishes of a tribe that does not want its reserved rights to be 
assessed by a state at all or put in issue in a Clean Water Act administrative process are respected? What happens 
when a state ignores the information provided by a tribe or the federal trustee? Moreover, while the preamble notes, 
“where information is conflicting, there are gaps in information, and/or a difference of opinion exists between the 
state and one or more tribes about the level of water quality necessary to protect a reserved right, EPA will take 
action based on the best available information in the same way that EPA currently makes WQS decisions in these 
circumstances in other contexts,” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371, this may be cold comfort during certain administrations’ 
review of state water quality standards, as we saw in the human health criteria rollbacks of the last administration. 
As with preparation of materials required to determine the level of protection for tribal reserved rights, we 
are also concerned about the resources it is likely to take tribes to engage with states regarding the very existence of 
their rights. At 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,375, EPA asks for comment on the following conclusion, “While tribal right 
holders would not be direct respondents, EPA acknowledges that the proposed regulation would require that state 
submissions be informed by the right holders. EPA believes this would not lead to increased burden on right 
 
19 At the end of its description of the process for “Determining if Tribal Reserved Rights Apply,” EPA indicates that “[i]n 
addition to seeking input from potential right holders, EPA will also consider other sources of information regarding applicable 
tribal reserved rights including the language of the treaties, statutes, or Executive orders and relevant judicial precedent.” 87 
Fed. Reg. at 74,368. We note that in many cases this should be the starting and end point of the analysis. Other pertinent 
sources of information that are not listed in this passage include legislative history and prior federal actions in which an agency 
has already recognized the need to protect tribal reserved rights, such as prior Department of Interior or Bureau of Indian 
Affairs analyses or past EPA decisions. Good examples are the very materials that EPA cites in this preamble related to the 
human health criteria processes in Maine and Washington.  

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 27 of 29 
holders because the proposed rule would not require additional coordination beyond that which already occurs 
during WQS public participation processes and EPA’s consultations with tribal governments.” We disagree with 
this statement. While it is true that we and many other tribes actively participate in existing WQS public 
participation processes and while we welcome this rule, there is no question that there will be additional burdens on 
us and other tribes as a result of it. It takes time and money to engage in administrative processes, and it takes even 
more time and money to engage in administrative processes where sovereigns do not agree. In order to support 
protective criteria, we are likely to need to conduct or commission fish consumption surveys and other materials to 
establish the level of water quality necessary to protect our rights. With respect to characterization and geographic 
location of tribal reserved rights, this rule may necessitate additional time and cost associated with leadership-to-
leadership meetings between tribes, states, and EPA; preparation of comments and legal analyses; and potentially 
even legal action. We therefore again request that the Federal government provide funding to help tribes engage in 
this process. 
Finally, EPA proposes to modify 40 C.F.R. § 131.20 to require that a state’s “triennial review process 
include an evaluation of whether there are tribal reserved rights applicable to waters subject to the state’s WQS and 
whether WQS need to be revised to protect those rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,367, 74,378-79 (proposed § 
131.20(a)). We understand that states will need a little time to implement this rule as practical matter and agree that 
the triennial review is a good way to first incorporate the Reserved Rights Rule’s requirements. Of course, EPA is 
aware that triennial reviews can sometimes be delayed and some are currently in process. While a gradual process 
may be ok (or even beneficial) in some circumstances), states are on notice now that a final rule is on its way, so 
they should begin thinking about whether any WQS revisions they are currently undertaking implicate tribal 
reserved rights. We do not think that potentially less protective criteria should be grandfathered in, as it were, just 
because the revision process began before the Reserved Rights Rule has been completed. Where a state already has 
adopted a sustenance fishing designated use—as the state of Maine has for certain waters—the state should ensure 
that any criteria it revises be sufficient to protect tribal reserved rights in those waters, regardless of when this rule 
is finalized.  
. 
. 
. 
To conclude, the Band thanks EPA for recognizing the need to ensure that water quality standards protect 
tribal reserved rights and the people who depend on exercise of their rights for their health and well-being, 
livelihoods, culture, religion, and community cohesion. We encourage you to move swiftly to finalize the proposed 
rule, but to do so with the comments made here firmly in mind. We do not believe EPA should finalize a rule that 
would allow the omission of certain components of WQS or that would put a state in the position of defining the 
scope, nature, or current or past use of a Tribe’s reserved rights, and we look forward to EPA refining the final rule 
and preamble to address these concerns. The Band appreciates EPA’s efforts to restore meaningful government-to-
government consultation with respect to agency rulemakings like this, which were either pro forma or non-existent 
under the prior administration. We are available and more than happy to discuss this matter further should you have 
any questions about our comments or would like to discuss possible resolutions to any potential problems we have 
identified in the proposed rule. You may contact Jane Steadman at jsteadman@kanjikatzen.com or 206-344-8100 
with any questions you might have or to coordinate further discussion. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Clarissa Sabattis 
Chief, Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians 
 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 28 of 29 
cc 
Deborah Nagle, Director, Office of Science and Technology (OST), U.S. EPA Headquarters  
Andy Byrne, Senior Advisor and Lead of the Policy and Partnership Team, American Indian Environmental Office, 
Office of International and Tribal Affairs, U.S. EPA Headquarters  
Sara Hisel-McCoy, Director, Standards and Health Protection Division of OST, U.S. EPA Headquarters 
Jennifer Brundage, Rule Manager for Proposed WQS Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved  
Rights, Standards and Health Protection Division of OST, U.S. EPA Headquarters  
Corey Buffo, Environmental Protection Specialist, U.S. EPA Headquarters 
Michael Knapp, Attorney-Advisor, U.S. EPA Region 1 
 
 

 
88  Bell Road   Littleton, Me  04730   www.maliseets.com 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments Page 29 of 29 
Index of Attachments 
Attachment 1, Newsletters.pdf 
Attachment 2, Photographs.pdf 
Attachment 3, Nicole Ogrysko, New Research Shows Dangers of Consuming Freshwater Fish Laced with 
PFAS.pdf 
Attachment 4, Aroostook Band of Micmacs And Houlton Band of Maliseets Integrated Resources Management 
Plan Survey Report of Land Use and Natural Resource Priorities.pdf 
Attachment 5, Letter from Hilary Tompkins, Maine's WQS and Tribal Fishing Rights of Maine Tribes.pdf 
Attachment 6, Letter from Ann Marie Bledsoe Downes, Principal Deputy Solicitor, Dep’t of Interior, regarding 
Tribal Fishing Rights of Maine Tribes.pdf 
Attachment 7, EPA Region 1, Analysis Supporting EPA’s February 2, 2015 Decision to Approve, Disapprove, and 
Make No Decision on, Various Maine Water Quality Standards, Including Those Applied to 
Waters of Indian Lands in Maine.pdf 
Attachment 8, 1993 Solicitor Letter.pdf 
Attachment 9, Katherine Zogas, The Clean Water Act's Antidegradation Policy Has It Been Dumped.pdf 
Attachment 10, John Chilson, Keeping Clean Waters Clean Making the Clean Water Act's Antidegradation Policy 
Work.pdf 
Attachment 11, Kent Modesitt, Antidegradation A Lost Cause or the Next Cause.pdf 
Attachment 12, 19.13 The Antidegradation Policy, Public Natural Resources Law, Second  Edition.pdf 
Attachment 13, Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians Comments on EPA Notification.pdf 
Attachment 14, US Army Corps, Great Lakes and Mississippi River Interbasin Study Team, Treaty Rights and 
Subsistence Fishing.pdf 
Attachment 15, Cass Sunstein, The Limits of Quantification.pdf 
Attachment 16, 2019 NCAI et al. Comments on MATS Rule Reconsideration of Supplemental Finding and 
Residual Risk.pdf 
Attachment 17, Wabanaki Traditional Cultural Lifeways Exposure Scenario.pdf 
Attachment 18, CRITFC, A Fish Consumption Survey.pdf 
Attachment 19, NEJAC, Fish Consumption and Environmental Justice.pdf

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0306 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center, 
Office of Water Docket, Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re:  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions To Protect Tribal Reserved 
Rights, Docket ID No. EPA–HQ–OW–2021–0791 
 
Dear Ms. Brundage, 
Thank you for providing Doyon, Limited (“Doyon”) the opportunity to submit the 
following comments on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) proposed revisions 
to the agency’s Clean Water Act water quality standards (“WQS”) regulations relating to 
protection of aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources reserved to Indian tribes. Water 
Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions To Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 
(Dec. 5, 2022) (“Proposed Rule”).  
Doyon is one of the Alaska Native regional corporations established by Congress 
under the terms of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (“ANCSA”). Headquartered in 
Fairbanks, Doyon has more than 20,400 Alaska Native shareholders. Doyon is the largest 
private landowner in Alaska, with a land entitlement under ANCSA of more than 12.5 million 
acres. Doyon’s lands extend from the Brooks Range in the north to the Alaska Range in the 
south and from the Alaska-Canada border in the east to almost the Bering Sea in the west. 
Doyon’s mission is to continually enhance its position as a financially strong Native 
corporation to promote the economic and social well-being of its current and future 
shareholders, to strengthen its Native way of life, and to protect and enhance its land and 
resources.  
Doyon’s comments focus specifically on EPA’s and other federal agencies’ obligation 
to consult with ANCSA Corporations, which the Proposed Rule fails to address, and which is 
a critical tool for Doyon to carry out its mission. 
Under federal law, EPA is required to consult with ANCSA Corporations on the same 
basis as Indian tribes. In Executive Order (“EO”) 13175, Consultation and Coordination with 
Indian Tribal Governments, President Clinton required federal agencies to implement an 
effective process to ensure meaningful and timely consultation with tribes during the 
development of policies or projects that may have tribal implications. Such consultation is 
intended to ensure meaningful tribal participation in planning and decision-making 

2 
 
1 Doyon Place, Suite 300 | Fairbanks, Alaska 99701-2941 | (907) 459-2000 WWW.DOYON.COM 
 
processes for actions with the potential to affect tribal interests. Although EO 13175 itself 
applies specifically to federally-recognized tribal governments, pursuant to Public Law No. 
108-199, 118 Stat. 452, as amended by Public Law No. 108-447, 118 Stat. 3267, Congress 
specifically extended these obligations to ANCs, requiring the Office of Management and 
Budget (“OMB”) and all Federal agencies to “consult with Alaska Native corporations on the 
same basis as Indian tribes under Executive Order No. 13175.” Consolidated Appropriations 
Act, 2004, Pub. L. 108-199, Div. H § 161, 118 Stat. 3, 452 (2004), as amended by Consolidated 
Appropriations Act, 2005, Pub. L. 108-447, Div. H, Title V § 518, 118 Stat. 2809, 3267 (2004). 
In November 2009, President Obama signed a Memorandum for the Heads of 
Executive Departments and Agencies on Tribal Consultation, in which he emphasized his 
commitment to “regular and meaningful consultation and collaboration with tribal officials 
in policy decisions that have tribal implications including, as an initial step, through complete 
and consistent implementation of Executive Order 13175.” Following from this 
Memorandum, in July 2010, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget issued a 
Memorandum for the Heads of Executive Departments and Agencies, and Independent 
Regulatory Agencies on Guidance for Implementing E.O. 13175, “Consultation and 
Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments,” in order to “help Federal agencies to comply 
with their obligations to provide meaningful consultation and collaboration” and “to 
promote greater openness in government.” This guidance specifically recognized that “OMB 
and all Federal agencies “are required to “consult with Alaska Native corporations on the 
same basis as Indian tribes under Executive Order No. 13175.” 
In accordance with these mandates and guidance, EPA has developed Guiding 
Principles for Consulting with Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) Corporations to 
“clarify how the [EPA] engages in consultation and coordination with Alaska Native Claims 
Settlement Act (ANCSA) corporations.” Under these Principles, “EPA recognizes its 
obligation [under federal law] to ‘consult with [ANCSA] corporations on the same basis as 
Indian tribes under Executive Order 13175.’” 
Unfortunately, while the Proposed Rule specifically addresses consultation with 
federally recognized Indian tribes, it fails to appropriately recognize its obligation to consult 
with ANCSA Corporations. Proposed section 131.9(b) provides that, “In reviewing State 
water quality standards submissions under this section, EPA will initiate tribal consultation 
with the right holders, consistent with applicable EPA tribal consultation policies, in 
determining whether State water quality standards protect applicable tribal reserved rights 
in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74378. The Proposed Rule 
further explains that: 
Although proposed 40 CFR 131.9(b) would specifically apply to EPA’s review of state 
WQS submissions, EPA intends, per its 2011 Policy on Consultation and Coordination 
with Tribes, the 2016 EPA Policy on Consultation and Coordination with Indian 
Tribes: Guidance for Discussing Tribal Treaty Rights, and applicable EPA regional 
consultation procedures, to initiate consultation with tribes in the geographic area 
where any WQS decision under EPA’s consideration may affect tribal interests, 
including reserved rights. EPA would consider all relevant information obtained 

3 
 
1 Doyon Place, Suite 300 | Fairbanks, Alaska 99701-2941 | (907) 459-2000 WWW.DOYON.COM 
 
through consultation to help ensure that the agency is fully informed before taking a 
WQS action. 
87 Fed. Reg. at 74372-73 (footnotes omitted).  
Just as they could affect the interests of Indian tribes in a particular geographic area, 
WQS submissions and WQS actions also could affect the interests of ANCSA Corporations in 
a particular geographic area. Any final rule, therefore, must similarly recognize EPA’s 
obligation to consult with ANCSA Corporations “on the same basis as Indian tribes,” 
reference applicable authorities, including EPA’s Guiding Principles for Consulting with 
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (ANCSA) Corporations, and commit to consultation with 
potentially impacted ANCSA Corporations before taking a WQS action. 
Doyon cannot overstate the importance of federal agencies’ obligations to consult 
with Doyon and other ANCSA Corporations regarding these and other activities under 
Executive Order No. 13175, as specifically extended to the ANCSA Corporations by Congress. 
Pursuant to Federal law and policy, EPA must ensure that ANCSA Corporations are provided 
the opportunity to meaningfully participate in WQS actions and other Federal agency 
decision-making processes that could impact our ability to fulfill the purposes for which we 
were established under ANCSA and to protect and advance the economic, social, and cultural 
interests of our shareholders. 
Thank you for your consideration of these comments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Sarah E. Obed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Senior Vice President, External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Doyon, Limited

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0237 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
1 
 
BAY MILLS INDIAN COMMUNITY 
“GNOOZHEKAANING” PLACE OF THE PIKE 
 
BAY MILLS TRIBAL ADMINISTRATION 
12140 West Lakeshore Drive 
Brimley, Michigan 49715 
 
 
 
WEBSITE: BAYMILLS.ORG 
 
 
 
 PHONE: (906) 248-3241 
  
FAX: (906) 248-3283 
 
 
  
March 6, 2023 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of the Administrator 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave, N.W. 
Washington DC, 20460 
 
Submitted electronically via www.regulations.gov  
 
RE: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791; Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to 
Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
Dear Administrator: 
 
Gnoozhekaaning, “the Place of the Pike” or Bay Mills Indian Community (Bay Mills) is a federally 
recognized Indian Tribe and signatory to the Treaty of March 28, 1836 (7 Stat. 491) by which the right to 
hunt, fish, and gather on 13.8 million acres of what is now the State of Michigan, and on over 12.2 million 
acres of lakes Superior, Michigan and Huron was expressly reserved for all time. Bay Mills strongly 
supports EPA’s effort to recognize off-reservation tribal reserved rights and to revise federal water quality 
standards (WQS) regulations to protect them. These revisions represent the most definitive and impactful 
steps the agency has taken to fulfill its trust responsibilities to tribes. 
 
Bay Mills has the following comments, concerns, and answers to specific requested information: 
 
1. The proposed regulatory revisions will require states to undertake many actions, which include 
determining the level of water quality necessary to protect tribal reserved rights. These 
requirements will result in states gathering and interpreting tribal information. One of the biggest 
challenges and unknowns with this proposed revision is how tribally-supplied information will be 
incorporated into decision making. It is unclear whether tribal perspectives about their own 
reserved rights will be treated with the highest regard by states or EPA. Furthermore, it is not clear 
how the EPA will handle situations where tribes disagree with conclusions drawn by states 
regarding treaty protected resources. Bay Mill’s supports the comment letter provided by 
EarthJustice on behalf of several tribes, including Bay Mills, as it articulates in detail the potential 
issues with delegation to the States. 
 
2. Within the federal register notice, EPA requests additional information on types of reserved rights 
that should be considered in the revisions. Bay Mills will not quantify our reserved rights. Rather, 
it is important to recognize that tribal culture, natural resources and environmental health, and treaty 
rights are all intricately interwoven and interdependent. And, without clean water, none of these 
are sustainable. Bay Mills, therefore, reserves the right to clean water. We ask that EPA recognize 
the interconnectedness of our lifeway when acting to protect our tribally reserved rights. 
 
3. Bay Mills is a fishing community, and has relied on fishing for its subsistence and economic needs 
since time immemorial. EPA acknowledges that poor water quality disproportionally impacts tribal 

2 
 
communities like ours, whose lifeways rely heavily on fish consumption. Bay Mills fully supports 
EPA’s efforts to protect the health of our tribal citizens. Bay Mills is committed to work with EPA 
on this issue. 
 
4. Bay Mills also supports EPA’s effort to protect tribal reserved rights at levels unsuppressed by 
water quality. The application of these protections to waters where Bay Mills is actively attempting 
restoration of wild rice and fisheries will be of utmost importance. We understand the complexity 
of EPA’s approach to use historic and currently available data to balance heritage use of a resource 
with what is reasonably attainable today. 
 
5. Within the federal register notice, EPA requests additional information on what sources of 
information should be considered, including historic information, to quantify level of water quality 
necessary to protect tribal reserved rights. Tribal knowledge and tribal ecological knowledge should 
be at the apex of decision making regarding tribal reserved rights. In the least, tribal knowledge 
should never be discounted when determining the protection of tribal reserved rights. However, it 
remains unclear how EPA and states would treat tribal ecological knowledge with this regulatory 
revision. 
 
6. Furthermore, EPA requests information on what factors should be considered when there is 
conflicting science, there are gaps in science, and/or there are different conclusions among 
stakeholders. Likewise, tribes should have the ultimate voice in how their reserved rights are 
protected. 
 
7. Bay Mills supports the highest classification of protection for waters where we hold treaty rights. 
 
Bay Mills reiterates its support for the EPA’s effort to recognize off-reservation tribal reserved rights and 
to revise the federal WQS regulations to protect our treaty rights. Our treaty reserved rights and resources 
have experienced continual disregard and degradation after losing sole stewardship of our resources. The 
principle and goal set forth in this regulatory revision is long overdue. We look forward to working with 
EPA to ensure that our treaty reserved rights and resources are fully protected for perpetuity. 
 
Chi miigwetch (thank you), 
 
 
 
 
Whitney B. Gravelle 
President, Executive Council 
Bay Mills Indian Community

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0235 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Buena Vista Rancheria of Me-Wuk Indians 
1418 20th Street Suite 200 
Sacramento, CA  95811 
Office 916.491.0011  
Fax 916.491.0012 
 
 
March 3, 2023 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
Attention: Jennifer Brundage 
Office of Water Standards and Health Protection Division 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington D.C. 20460 
 
Re: Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Dear USEPA, 
Buena Vista Rancheria of Me-Wuk Indians (BVR) is a federally recognized Native American 
Tribe located within the Mokelumne River Watershed of Northern California. Buena Vista 
Rancheria is writing to provide comments regarding the Proposed Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights by EPA. BVR intends to reaffirm our 
interest in ongoing government to government consultation throughout EPA’s process to develop 
this new rule within 40 CFR Part 131.  
BVR thanks EPA for proposing this rule to protect tribal reserved rights related to water 
resources and create water quality standards to protect these rights. BVR; however, is concerned 
about scope of the proposed regulation as it is only protective of tribal water uses that are defined 
by the federal government as reserved rights and does not recognize water uses as identified by 
tribes themselves. There are many federally unrecognized tribes that will be left out by this rule 
and many tribal water uses that will be missed by only focusing on the reserved rights. Buena 
Vista Rancheria recommends this rule to better protect tribal water uses as described and 
determined by tribes.  
There are parallel processes taking place in the State of California where the State and Regional 
Water Boards are looking to designate Tribal Beneficial Uses of water to waterbodies and then 
adopt water quality standards to protect the tribal beneficial use. This pathway offers an 
alternative for Tribes to utilize as a means to protect human health regarding the use on a water 
body. Unfortunately, this mechanism is not available in all states; therefore, EPA should consider 
developing a secondary pathway to protect tribal uses of water either by to identifying tribal 
designated uses on a federal level, broaden this rule to include non-reserved rights, develop a 
rule to push States to adopt tribal beneficial uses, or some other mechanism.  

 
 
Buena Vista Rancheria of Me-Wuk Indians 
1418 20th Street Suite 200 
Sacramento, CA  95811 
Office 916.491.0011  
Fax 916.491.0012 
 
Furthermore, this rule does not clearly articulate who will be responsible for identifying tribal 
reserved rights, though it has been stated that this determination will be left to the states. There 
must be clear guidance, developed in consultation with tribes, to outline a process the federal 
government and/or states follow when identifying reserved rights. This process should require 
tribal consultation as a practice in identifying reserved rights to ensure tribal rights are protected. 
If a state does not recognize a tribe’s asserted reserved right, there must be a process to hold 
states accountable for recognizing and protecting a tribe’s right(s).  
In this process to identify reserved rights, pollutants of concern, and water quality standards 
needed to protect the right, tribes must be consulted and included throughout the entire process. 
This means open and transparent communication with tribes regarding the identification of 
reserved rights, on which water body, pollution contamination levels, scientific research, 
literature, and analyses used to develop a water quality standard to protect that use. It is 
important to note that although in some cases a single water quality standard may be protective 
across a state or region, the rule should allow for water quality standards to be tailored and 
specific to the reserved right on a case-by-case basis in consultation with the tribal reserve right 
holder.   
Currently, through various land back movements and government programs, tribes are acquiring 
new ownership and management over ancestral lands. This creates the need for an open and 
continual process for ongoing consultation and discussions with tribes. The historic and 
continuing uses section of the rule addresses the connections of tribes; however, it does not 
address revitalized connections. In California and in many other states tribes have been 
disconnected from their ancestral areas and are revitalizing their ceremonies and connections. 
This process must consider new or revitalized connections as well as continual uses of aquatic 
resources. 
Finally, BVR would like to ensure that the EPA and states are clear in understanding that they do 
not need to request culturally sensitive information about water uses, and must respect tribal 
confidentiality regarding water uses in identifying reserved rights, and working toward 
developing the standards to protect that right. Many of the sites are protected by the National 
Historic Preservation Act Section 106 and many other state laws. These laws require continual 
tribal consultation and consideration with regards to effects on the areas as well as confidentiality 
for sensitive information.  
Please reach out to Buena Vista Rancheria Staff for questions or clarification.  
 
 

 
 
Buena Vista Rancheria of Me-Wuk Indians 
1418 20th Street Suite 200 
Sacramento, CA  95811 
Office 916.491.0011  
Fax 916.491.0012 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Emily Moloney 
Water Program Coordinator 
emily@bvtribe.com

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0268 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
President - Rickey L. Armstrong, Sr. 
Clerk - 13ethany Johnson 
90 OHINO1  WAY 
ALLEGANY TERRITORY 
SENECA NATION 
SALAMANCA, NY 14779 
Tel. (716) 945-1790 
FAX (716) 945-1565 
Seneca Nation of Indians 
Treasurer - Matthew B. Page s 
12837 ROUTE 438 
CATTARAUGUS TERRITORY 
SENECA NATION 
IRVING, NY 14081 
Tel. (716) 532-4900 
FAX (716) 532-6272 
PRESIDENT'S OFFICE 
March 6, 2023 
Mr. Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Sub!Wed via https://www.regulations.gov/ 
Re: 
Seneca Nation Comments on Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, Proposed 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
The Seneca Nation (the "Nation") fully supports the efforts of the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency ("EPA") to protect treaty and other reserved rights of Native nations, in this instance 
through the proposed Water Quality Standards ["WQS"] Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022) (the "Proposed Rule"). 
The Nation has reserved treaty rights to hunting and fishing in lands west of the Genesee River in 
New York State (the "State"). Although we ceded approximately 3.5 million acres in the 1797 
Treaty of Big Tree' ("Treaty"), we did not cede all rights to that territory. A key provision of that 
Treaty contained a reservation of fishing and hunting rights within the land we relinquished: "Also, 
2  Agreement with the Seneca, dated Sept. 15, 1797 (7 Stat. 601). 

excepting and reserving to them, the said parties of the first part and their heirs, the privilege of 
fishing and hunting on the said tract of land hereby intended to be conveyed."2 
The State has been the primary beneficiary of the Treaty of Big Tree along with the holder of the 
preemption rights, investor Robert Morris. The Nation received pennies per acre amid allegations 
of bribery of our traditional chiefs. Part of the reason our ancestors approved the Treaty was the 
reassurance the citizens of the Nation would retain the traditional hunting and fishing rights to our 
ceded territories, necessary for our survival.3  The bargained-for exchange, accounts for part of the 
almost unconscionably low purchase price of our ceded lands. However, the United States 
Supreme Court significantly curtailed the meaningful expression of our hunting and fishing rights 
in 1916 deciding that our reserved treaty rights did not withstand the State's interest in preserving 
fish and game resulting in Nation citizens being forced to abide by hunting and fishing regulations 
applicable to the general publie 
Accordingly, our ability to exercise our hunting and fishing rights that were retained in our ceded 
territory were significantly diminished to hunt and fish at the times and by the manners we were 
accustomed—under the fallacy our citizens would harm the wildlife and the State would protect 
it—with the approbation and acquiesce of the federal government. The current State regulations 
recommend to only eat a few of the smaller fish species up to 4 times a month, due to pollution.5 
The recommended consumption of most other fish species is even less including many species 
listed as "do not eat."6
 The State's exercise of jurisdiction has negatively impacted the fish, 
animals, plants, and waters of our Nation, which has further curtailed the exercise of our reserved 
treaty rights. Both the limitations placed on us from eating our traditional diets and any 
consumption of polluted fish have negatively impacted the health and well-being of our people. 
The Nation welcomes any measure to rectify the current situation including support for this 
Proposed Rule. It is imperative that the State be required to maintain water quality and fish 
populations that are safe to eat in sustenance quantities in waters where the Nation has reserved 
the right to fish pursuant to the Treaty of Big Tree. 
In the Proposed Rule, EPA explains that "by amending EPA's WQS regulations, rather than 
addressing [tribal reserved rights] on a case-by-case basis as state WQS are submitted for review 
[. . 1, EPA is proposing a uniform approach for establishment of WQS where tribal reserved rights 
apply and clearly laying out how EPA will review such WQS." 87 Fed. Reg. at 74366. The Nation 
supports EPA's approach. Requiring a uniform approach will help protect all Native nations, not 
just those in states more favorably disposed to recognizing reserved rights. 
2  Id. 
3  Thomas Morrris' Speech, August 30, 1797, O'Reilley Collection XV. 
4  Kennedy v. Becker, 241 U.S. 556, 563-564 (1916). 
5  See New York State Department of Health Advisory Tables, Western Region Advice (February 3, 2023 10:08AM) 
Western Region Fish Advisories ( ny.gov). 
6  Id. 
Page 2 of 5 

We also would like to point out that the extent of tribal reserved rights goes beyond EPA's 
definition of the term in new 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(r) as "rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent 
resources reserved or held by tribes." We understand that the Proposed Rule is being promulgated 
under the Clean Water Act and therefore that it is tied to "waters of the United States." It bears 
keeping in mind, however, that the Nation has treaty rights to hunt that may extend beyond aquatic 
or aquatic-dependent resources, in the way contemplated under the Clean Water Act, although—
especially in the Seneca view—all life is dependent on water. The Nation's treaty rights also 
extend over resources not specifically discussed in the Proposed Rule, including various freshwater 
mussels and other culturally significant freshwater species, and plants used for medicinal and 
cultural purposes. 
The Nation also supports EPA's proposed addition of a new Section 131.9 to Title 40 of the Code 
of Federal Regulations. We support the proposed requirement in § 131.9(a)(1) that WQS must 
protect "the exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the 
aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource." We are concerned, however, that EPA's proposed 
interpretation of this requirement as being limited to protecting "reasonably anticipated future uses, 
taking into account factors that may have substantially altered a waterbody," Proposed Rule at 
74366-67, may result in undue limitations on tribal reserved rights. At a minimum, EPA should 
clarify that the concept of a reasonably anticipated future use most likely will change over time, 
and if uses expand — for example, due to the removal of dams impacting fisheries, which is already 
happening in parts of the country, cleanup of upstream polluted waters, or resource restoration 
projects — then the impacts on tribal reserved rights must be reevaluated. 
The Nation is also concerned as to the level of data the EPA will require to demonstrate 
unsuppressed uses. We understand the advantages of having underlying surveys and documents 
similar to the Wabanaki Traditional Cultural Lifeways Exposure Scenario to support claims to 
tribal reserved rights, but these take time to produce, and many tribes do not have the resources to 
conduct them. If there is a possibility for the EPA to identify funding, technical assistance, and 
other support to generate supporting data, that would be extremely valuable. Even if a Native 
nation chooses to do this work, its data sovereignty should be supported to decrease the 
exploitation by outside agencies. 
We request the language in the proposed section of § 131.9(a)(2) be clarified: "water quality 
standards must, to the extent supported by available data and information, be establish to protect: 
(2) The health of the right holders to at least the same risk level as provided to the general 
population of the State." At the consultation with EPA concerning the proposed rule, it was 
clarified that this would be a more protective standard for the cancer risk level of our citizens than 
being considered a highly exposed population. This is not the most natural reading of the Proposed 
Rule, and the Nation requests clarification so it is plain to all the standard is more protective of the 
rights holders. 
Page 3 of 5 

Proposed Rule § 131.9(b) provides: "In reviewing State water quality standards submissions under 
this section, EPA will initiate tribal consultation with the right holders, consistent with applicable 
EPA tribal consultation policies, in determining whether State water quality standards protect 
applicable tribal reserved rights in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section." The Nation 
strongly believes there should be a standard for consultation such as early and meaningful 
consultation imposed or a statutory deadline by which consultation with all right holders will 
commence. 
The Nation also supports the requirement in § 131.9(c) that WQS must designate uses and establish 
appropriate water quality criteria to protect those uses, pursuant to § 131.11. We agree that this 
process could involve creating a new designated use to protect the tribal reserved rights, with 
associated water quality criteria for that use, or developing revised criteria to protect the reserved 
right under an existing designated use, such as fishing, or both options. However, the Nation 
supports, that to protect tribal reserved rights, the antidegradation requirements referenced in § 
131.9(c)(3) should be required in addition to the designated uses and water quality criteria required 
in § 131.9(c)(1)-(2), not instead of those requirements. The regulatory text should say "and" 
instead of "and/or" when listing the requirements in § 131.9(c). The antidegradation options for 
Outstanding National Resource Waters and to ensure that any lowering of water quality will 
continue to protect tribal reserved rights (Options 1 and 2 in the Proposed Rule at 74371) can both 
be used to support designated uses and related water quality criteria that protect reserved rights. 
•
The Nation believes that narrative water quality criteria should be used only when numeric 
criteria cannot be established or to supplement numeric criteria, per existing § 131.11. 
Proposed Rule at 74368 says that "EPA is available to assist status in gathering more 
information, in coordination with the right holders, for future use" when data and 
information are not available or inconclusive. The Nation requests that this commitment to 
the regulation or in more formal guidance be include in the Proposed Rule. 
•
Additionally, information about key aquatic species of a Native nation could be provided, 
as EPA suggests (74368); however, the EPA must recognize the sovereignty of the Native 
nation and leave the decision to share that information, to the Nation. 
The Nation advocates for the inclusion of the new sentence in § 131.20(a), which requires a 
triennial review of WQS to "include evaluating whether there are tribal reserved rights applicable 
to State waters and whether water quality standards need to be revised to protect those rights 
pursuant to § 131.9." However, the only process specified for determining whether the WQS 
satisfy § 131.9 is the public participation required in existing § 131.20(b). The Nation requests that 
EPA provide a specific process to ensure that states do consult with Native nations. An early and 
meaningful, and deliberate partnership, not just a consultation should be required. States should 
engage in that process while they are reviewing their WQS, rather than leaving it up to EPA to 
determine whether there are tribal reserved rights at issue once the states have already submitted 
the WQS to EPA for review and approval, which is when § 131.9(b) is appropriate. Additionally, 
the EPA could also require that states contact all Native nations within their borders and 
neighboring jurisdictions, meet with them separately from the general public hearing provided in 
§ 131.20, and take their input into account when reviewing WQS. 
Page 4 of 5 

Lastly, it is common knowledge that the triennial review process does not in regularly take place 
every three years. To guarantee that a review of WQS takes place in a timely fashion in response 
to these revised WQS regulations, another sentence should be added to § 131.20(a) to require that, 
within two years of the effective date of this rulemaking, all states must review and, if needed, 
revise their WQS to protect tribal reserved rights. These rights, which are protected not only by 
the Clean Water Act but by the Constitution, have been disregarded for centuries. 
In closing, the Nation requests all Native territory receive the same protection as lands with 
reserved rights. Less than approximately twenty percent of Native nations have WQS under the 
CWA. Native nations deserve the same downstream protection that is provided to states across the 
United States even if they do not have their own approved WQS or even Treatment as a State 
("TAS") status. That reflects, not only the difficulty of obtaining such status under the CWA, but 
the failure of the federal government in upholding their responsibility to Native nations. We look 
forward to changes made through legislation and rulemaking to rectify some of the difficulties in 
the TAS process going forward to help properly protect the waters of Native nations. 
Thank you for your consideration of our comments. Again, we appreciate the initiative EPA has 
taken to begin to protect the reserved rights of Native nations. 
Respectfully submitted, 
Rickey LV rmstrong, Sr., Presiden 
SENECA NATION 
Page 5 of 5

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0179 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
l'u~allu~ Tr'ibe cf Indians 
Jennifer Brundage 
Office of Water, Standards 
and Health Protection Division 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
Filed Electronically 
March O 1, 2023 
Re:Docket ID NO. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
On behalf of the Puyallup Tribe of Indians, I write these comments in support of the Environmental 
Protection Agency's proposed revisions to the Federal Clean Water Act water quality standards 
(WQS) regulation to clarify and prescribe how WQS must protect aquatic and aquatic-dependent 
resources reserved to tribes through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of Federal 
law. Se, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022). 
To understand our perspective on this matter, we provide a brief description of the Puyallup Tribe 
and our history. 
I. 
Introduction 
A. Puyallup Tribe of Indians 
The Puyallup Tribe of Indians is a federally recognized Tribe located in Pierce County, Washington 
along the shores of Commencement Bay, a large inlet of Puget Sound. The Puyallup Tribe is a 
signatory to the Treaty of Medicine Creek, 10 Stat. 1132. Under this Treaty, the Tribe reserved the 
lands for its Reservation, which was established by two subsequent Executive Orders. Executive 
Order of January 20, 1857; Executive Order September 6, 1873. Over the next fifty years, 
notwithstanding the establishment of the Tribe's Reservation, the Tribe lost ownership to most of 
the land within its Reservation as a result of Acts of Congress authorizing and directing the 
allotment and sale of reservation land, court decisions and other private and federal actions. See 
H.R. Rep. No. 101-57, at 3 (1989). With the enactment of the Indian Reorganization Act, 25 U.S.C. 
§§ 461-479, the Tribe adopted a constitution and organized its Tribal government, which then set 
out to restore the Tribal land base and develop programs to better serve its tribal members. 
In 1983, the Tribe's title to the bed of the Puyallup River and adjacent exposed lands, including 
lands within the Port of Tacoma, was confirmed by the federal court. Puyallup Tribe v. Port of 
3009 E. Portland Ave. 
Tacoma, Washington 98404 
253/573-7800 

March O 1, 2023 
Page2 
Tacoma, 717 F.2d 1251 (9th Cir. 1983). This decision gave rise to an historic Settlement Agreement 
between the Tribe, the City of Tacoma, the Port of Tacoma, the State of Washington and the Federal 
Government, which was enacted by Congress. Puyallup Tribe of Indians Settlement Act of 1989, 
Public Law 101-41, 25 U.S.C. §§ 1773-et seq. (1989). The Settlement Act restored to the Tribe 
nearly 1000 acres ofland, including lands within the Port of Tacoma. Today the Puyallup 
Reservation is located in Pierce County, extends into King County, and includes areas within the 
City of Tacoma, all of Fife, and parts of several other municipalities and unincorporated areas. The 
Tribe has a membership of nearly 6000 people. 
In the Treaty of Medicine Creek, the Puyallup Tribe also reserved its right to fish in its usual and 
accustomed places, and to hunt and gather on opened and unclaimed lands. These rights were 
affirmed in numerous Supreme Court cases including Puyallup Tribe v. Department of Game, 391 
U.S. 392 (1968), Department of Game v. Puyallup Tribe, 414 U.S. 44 (1973), Puyallup Tribe v. 
Department of Game, 433 U.S. 165 (1977); and Washington v. Washington State Commercial 
Passenger Fishing Vessel Ass 'n, 443 U.S. 658 (1979). The Tribe, through its Fisheries Department 
and Shellfish Department, works in conjuncture with federal, state and other tribal agencies to 
ensure that the environment for its treaty protected resources (which includes not only the Puyallup 
River and its tributaries, but also large areas of the Puget Sound) is protected and preserved. This is 
necessary not only because Tribal members rely on these resources for economic support, but also 
because these resources and the environment in which they live serve as the foundation of the 
Puyallup Tribe's cultural and spiritual practices. 
B. Tribal Treaty Reserved Rights must be considered in establishing WQS 
The land and rights reserved for the Tribe are what our ancestors secured, so that our children and 
grandchildren would have a place to live, work, fish, pray and raise their families. If our 
Reservations and the places where we exercise our rights are not environmentally safe, then all that 
was reserved to us in the Treaties are in jeopardy. Thus, specific consideration of treaty reserved 
rights in aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources in establishing State (and Tribal) Water Quality 
Standards (WQS) is critical to ensure that we will continue to have the benefit of the bargain our 
ancestors struck with the United States. 
Treaty rights are inseparable from the natural environment on which Indian tribes rely for our 
wellbeing. Thus, as EPA undertakes to review and approve State WQSs, we have always asserted 
that the law requires that the EPA consider "What impacts will these standards have on tribes and 
are their specific treaty rights?" with the fundamental principle that Indian tribes' federally-
protected rights to their homelands and to hunt, fish, gather and pray can only be guaranteed when 
the natural world is healthy and safe enough to sustain those activities. Thus, we strongly support 
the EPA's effort to amend the WQS regulation to explicitly address how WQS must protect tribal 
reserved rights as to aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources. This will ensure a WQS process that 
is transparent and consistent for all stakeholders. 
Below we discuss in detail our comment on the proposed rule. 
II. Discussion of the proposed rule 
3009 E. Portland Ave. 
Tacoma, Washington 98404 
253/573-7800 

March 01, 2023 
Page 3 
1. Determining if Tribal Reserved Rights Apply 
The EPA requested comments on whether there are additional types of Tribal reserved rights that 
should be considered in addition to the rights to fish, gather aquatic plants, and to hunt for aquatic-
dependent animals. 87 Fed. Reg. 74367 (December 5, 2022). We would assert that all the species 
that we fish, hunt and gather are aquatic-dependent resources. Thus, in examining WQS standards 
we must consider not only fish and shellfish, but the terrestrial and waterfowl species that rely on 
our rivers and waterbodies to survive. 
We suggest EPA add one critical right and activity that is attendant to the exercise of our hunting, 
fishing and gathering rights which is the right to pray in these waters. See, Too Long Too Silent: The 
Threat to Cedar and Sacred Ways of the Skokomish, American Indian Culture Research Journal 
(1993). We have prayed and used our waters for religious purposes since the beginning of time, and 
it is important that this right be recognized as a use of these waters in setting WQS. These waters 
are for all intents and purposes our baptisteries and should be acknowledged as such. 
We are concerned that EPA is going to require Tribes to demonstrate where and how the right is 
exercised by the right holders. Id. While the preamble indicates that these inquiries are limited to 
specific water bodies or waters generally within a broad geographic area, and whether the right is 
for subsistence purposes, our experience with the Army Corps of Engineers teaches us that this 
could result in the EPA requiring Tribes to indicate the exact locations and times that we exercise 
our treaty rights, exactly how we do this, and for how long, and that a particular WQS is necessary 
to preserve the exercise of the right in a specific location. See, Tribal Treaty Rights Effects 
Determination, USACE Seattle District Policy (July 27, 2020) (Attached as Exhibit 1). Thus, we 
believe EPA should only require the nature of the right in broad geographic terms, or in the case of 
Tribes in the Northwest, our adjudicated Usual and Accustomed Areas ("U&A's"). We do not 
believe it is necessary to ask how the right is exercised as we see no relevancy of this question to 
establishing WQS. 
However, if the EPA is going to insist on this being a prong of the inquiry, we think the correct 
question is "Why is the right being exercised?" For Puyallup and other Tribes in the Northwest, we 
have a Treaty right to 50% of the harvestable fisheries species in our U&A's, we exercise this right 
both for commercial and subsistence purposes, and we gather other aquatic-dependent resources for 
subsistence and cultural purposes. Thus, the inquiry should be is the right a subsistence right, treaty 
commercial right, and/or for cultural purposes, and not how the right is exercised. Again, we rely on 
the waters of our territories for all these purposes and believe that the WQS should be based on an 
understanding that these activities and uses are coexistent with one another. 
2. 
Protecting Applicable Reserved Rights 
a. Determining the level of Water Quality Necessary to Protect the Right 
We agree with the Preamble's direction that States and Tribal right holders should establish lines of 
communications to develop WQS that are necessary to protect any aquatic or aquatic-dependent 
3009 E. Portland Ave. 
Tacoma, Washington 98404 
253/573-7800 

March 01, 2023 
Page4 
resources. Id. at 74368. This includes working with Tribal communities to gather accurate data on 
fish consumption rates, and utilization of aquatic-dependent resources (which again includes 
terrestrial resources and waterfowl), as well as the water itself (this includes not only for 
cultural/religious activities but uses for other activities like Tribal fish hatcheries, acclimation and 
rearing ponds, and related facilities). 
b. Accounting for Suppression Effects 
We agree with the change to §131.9(a)(l) that WQS must be established to "protect the 'exercise of 
the tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-
depended resource."' In 2013, a 135-acre tract ofland, the Redondo tract, where the Puyallup Tribal 
members exercise the right to harvest geoduck, was closed due to legacy arsenic contamination. 
This contamination resulted in China banning shellfish imports from the Northwest greatly 
impacting Tribal treaty commercial harvesters. This was because the State of Washington, unlike 
China, had not tested for inorganic arsenic, and had declared the Redondo tract safe for harvesting. 
Thus, our right to engage in our commercial treaty harvest was suppressed because the water quality 
was lower than necessary to engage in vital trade with a critical international partner. This also 
relates to the "why" the right is exercised, because once commercially harvested, these resources 
enter the international market, and we need these resources to meet the higher environmental 
standards of our trading partners. 
We endorse the Preamble's direction that States work with right holders to gather information about 
unsuppressed uses. Id. at 74369. This is consistent with the federal government's elevation of 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge in its decision making. 
c. Protecting Right Holders to the Same Risk Level as the General Populations. 
We also endorse the proposed rule treating Tribal members exercising reserved rights as a distinct, 
identifiable class of individuals holding legal rights to resources, whose reserved rights are unique 
to them and have a defmed geographic scope. Id. at 74370. This is critically important for deriving 
the human health water quality criteria, and as discussed above, for other purposes as well, 
including engaging in international trade. With regard to the human health criteria, for decades the 
fish consumption rate for the state of Washington was 6.5 grams per day (approximately 1 fish meal 
per month). It has been well established that tribal members consume fish in far larger quantities 
than one "fish meal" per month. Moreover, these criteria did not account for the consumption of 
other aquatic-dependent resources and other uses of the water itself. Nor did these criteria account 
for other risk factors that put tribal members, as an identifiable class, at a higher risk for cancer and 
other health conditions. Thus, the change to 13 l .9(a)(2) is vital to ensuring that WQS are based on 
actual data regarding the use of the water and aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources by Tribal 
right holders, as well as the recognized health risk factors that exist in tribal communities. 
d. Implementation of These Proposed Requirements. 
In the Preamble the EPA requests comment on whether there are instances beyond fish consumption 
and protection of wild rice where "WQS may need to be adjusted to protect tribal reserved rights 
3009 E. Portland Ave. 
Tacoma, Washington 98404 
253/573-7800 

March 01, 2023 
Page 5 
consistent with this proposed rulemaking." Id. at 74371. As we discussed, there are instances 
beyond fish consumption that necessitate more stringent criteria, in particular the commercial 
harvest and international trade of the resources. In addition, there is the consumption and use of 
aquatic-dependent resources, in particular aquatic-dependent vegetation, which we not only 
consume, but use for different cultural activities such as weaving; therefore, tribal members could 
be exposed to higher levels of toxins through skin absorption, and such a use would likely require a 
more stringent criterion. Finally, again we have prayed and used the waters in our territory for 
religious purposes since the beginning of time, and we need these waters to be available to use for 
these purposes, as it is vital to our tribal way of life. This use alone requires the most stringent WQS 
possible. 
EPA requested comment mi whether, in instances when there is conflicting information, gaps in 
information, or there is a difference of opinion between a State and Tribe, if there are other factors 
beyond the best available information to determine that a criteria is "scientifically defensible, that 
EPA should consider in resolving the conflict or disagreement." Id. at 74371. The scope of the best 
available information is critical, which is why the State and Tribal right holders must have a free 
and frank exchange of information. In addition, the best available information must include the 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge of the tribal people who have used and relied on the resources 
and waters for generations. This information must be accepted as real data and not be viewed as 
anecdotal or unreliable information. 
3. Options for Establishing WQS to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
We agree with the proposed rule designating Tribal reserved rights as an explicitly designated use, 
and where a use (i.e., fishing) is designated that the WQS be established to ensure that Tribes with 
reserved rights are protected to the level appropriate to protect the general population, are viable 
ways to proceed, and complement each other well in establishing WQS. To be sure, for waters 
where a particular use is not designated, it is important that all the tribal reserved rights be so 
designated, for example gathering cattails or other vegetation, in addition to fishing, and that the 
criteria be adjusted accordingly. And where a use is designated, i.e., fishing, requiring that the 
criteria must be adjusted to ensure to protect tribal member health. 
However, regarding the reliance on antidegradation, we agree that it is reasonable that WQS should, 
at a minimum, be established to ensure that the resources are maintained and not further degraded. 
But this must be the floor in setting WQS and cannot be the ceiling. Thus, this option cannot be to 
the exclusion of the other two options, but rather the baseline by which the other two options are 
implemented. We are also concerned with how this option is to be implemented in concert with 
§ 131.9( a)(l) which requires WQS to be established to protect the exercise of the tribal reserved 
rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource. 
Id. at 74368. Certainly, preventing further damage is critical, but that alone will not be sufficient to 
preserving and restoring tribal reserved rights into the future. 
We believe the proposed rule must be clear that the States will likely need to combine these 
methods to protect tribal reserved rights. Thus, designating a water body as an ONRW to prevent 
3009 E. Portland Ave. 
Tacoma, Washington 98404 
253/573-7800 

March 01, 2023 
Page6 
further degradation alone is not likely to protect tribal reserved rights, and that additional designated 
uses and corresponding criteria will likely be necessary. 
4. Use Attainability 
The preamble to the proposed rule requests comment on how States can revise their designated uses 
to ensure compliance with the revised§ 131.9. We agree that EPA should not modify §131.10 
( designated uses), but rather include in § 131.9 provisions that specify whether or how a State could 
revise designated uses to protect Tribal reserved rights. 
III. Conclusion 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide these comments and support EPA' s efforts to better 
protect Tribes' legally protected rights and resources, and thereby uphold the United States' 
responsibility under treaties, statutes and Executive Orders to Tribes throughout the country. 
Sincere() n 
B~~e~
mrmall 
Puyallup Tribe of Indians 
3009 E. Portland Ave. 
Tacoma, Washington 98404 
253/573-7800 

1 
 
Tribal Treaty Right Effect Determination Process  
 
Version: July 27, 2020 
 
 
What is the purpose of this document?   
 
As part of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), Seattle District’s permit application review 
process, we notify Tribes of proposed activities occurring within waters of interest to federally 
recognized Tribes, and request Tribal notification of any concerns or comments regarding the 
proposed activity’s effects.  If a Tribe has concerns regarding the proposed Department of the Army 
(DA) regulated activity, we will encourage the applicant and Tribe to work together to resolve those 
concerns, to the extent both the applicant and Tribe are amenable to that approach.   
 
Should a Tribe have unresolved concerns that rise to the level where the Tribe objects to USACE 
authorization of the activity on the basis that it would violate a Tribe’s reserved treaty right, the 
Tribe notifies the Seattle District of the Tribe’s objection.  In making a permit decision, the USACE 
must ensure it does not authorize an activity that would result in a violation of a Tribal treaty right.  
 
This document provides general information about the review process of the Seattle District once a 
Tribe notifies the agency of an objection to authorize a proposed activity because the Tribe is 
concerned the proposed activity would impermissibly infringe a Tribe’s treaty right.  
 
What effect would a Tribal objection based on tribal treaty rights have on the Seattle District’s 
permit decision? 
 
When presented with such an objection from a Tribe, the Seattle District considers project-specific 
information to determine whether the proposed activity under the USACE’s regulatory jurisdiction 
would result in an impermissible abrogation of the treaty right.   The USACE both recognizes its 
obligation to uphold Tribal treaty rights and that the applicant is entitled to a timely decision 
regarding its permit application.  In conducting this effects determination, the USACE is neither a 
proponent nor opponent for a permit application. 33 C.F.R § 320.1(4).  
 
If the USACE was to make a determination and finding that DA authorization of the applicant’s 
proposed activity would impermissibly infringe on a reserved treaty right, the USACE would need 
substantial evidence from an objecting Tribe to rebut the presumption that approval of the DA 
permit would not be contrary to the public interest. The applicant is afforded an opportunity to 
review and respond to the Tribe’s submission, and to submit evidence. The USACE must examine 
the specific facts of the situation in the context of existing information, law, and policy to determine 
whether the proposed project would abrogate a treaty right. In doing this, the USACE does not 
conduct a balancing test. If information before the Agency demonstrates the specific proposed 
project before the Agency would obstruct, eliminate, or interfere with the objecting Tribe’s access to 
its Usual and Accustomed fishing grounds and stations to such an extent the Tribe’s reserved treaty 
fishing right will be impermissibly impaired, the USACE does not have the authority to issue a 
permit for the project in the absence of a specific statutory authorization.  See Northwest Sea Farms 
v. United State Army Corps of Engineers, 931 F. Supp. 1515 (W.D.Wash. 1996).  If, however, the 
USACE determines that DA authorization of the proposed activity would not abrogate a treaty right, 
Exhibit 1

2 
 
the Corps would continue the full evaluation of the permit application notwithstanding the objection 
from the tribe.  
 
 
What information might assist Seattle District in determining whether an activity would 
abrogate a treaty right? 
 
As the Tribe has unique access to relevant information regarding the scope of its interest that would 
potentially be affected by the proposed DA regulated activity and how the proposed project would 
physically obstruct access to tribal Usual and Accustomed (U&A) places, an objecting Tribe with 
treaty-reserved fishing rights bears the burden of raising, and, thereafter, presenting, information to 
the agency sufficient to sustain an objection to the issuance of a proposed permit. In the absence of a 
raised and sustained objection, the Corps will presume the granting of a permit would not abrogate a 
treaty right.  
 
 
The Seattle District must have sufficient evidence to evaluate whether the proposed activity’s 
interference with a treaty right is of the type that would abrogate the right.  Potentially relevant 
information regarding the scope of the tribe’s interest includes: the specific proposed project’s 
effect(s) on the Tribe’s reserved treaty right regarding: (1) the geographic right of access to the 
Tribe’s U&A fishing places, (2) degradation of fish runs and habitat, (3) other treaty issues, as 
applicable.   
 
This determination must evaluate the specific treaty right alleged to be at risk of impairment by the 
proposed project by the applicant.  First, a treaty right must be established in the project area.  The 
Seattle District is in interested in the Tribe’s historic, present, and proposed use of the project site, 
and will also look to specific treaties and adjudicated treaty rights determinations, if available, 
regarding the project location.  Second, the Seattle District is interested in understanding the nature 
of the proposed activity’s effect(s) on the Tribe’s treaty rights.  Third, the Seattle District will 
consider other information provided by the Tribe in order to evaluate the extent of potential 
impact(s) to the Tribe’s treaty right, and whether the identified impacts impermissibly infringe on 
the treaty right.  The USACE may also choose to seek out additional information from public 
sources or third parties regarding certain topics, such as fish conservation matters or applicable 
regulatory parameters.  The applicant may choose to present evidence to respond to submissions by 
the tribe, but is under no obligation to add to the record.  
 
 
Documentation to support this fact specific inquiry may include, but is not necessarily limited to: 
 
 Affidavits/declarations from Tribal members explaining, as applicable: 
1. How often, and, when, Tribal harvesting at the location in question has occurred; and if it 
is intended to occur in the future? 
2. Type of fishing/harvesting method(s) involved in fishing/harvesting from the site, e.g., dip 
net, reef net, drift net etc. 
3. How would Tribal access to fishing/harvesting sites be affected by the proposed project? 
What standoff distance(s) would the tribe need to maintain from the proposed project, and, 
why; as well as how many acres of fishing (for that species) with that specific fishing 
method would become inaccessible or impaired?  
Exhibit 1

3 
4. Information about the applicable conservation and/or management plans regarding the
fishery in and around the project area.
Drawing/map showing location of the fishing activity in relation to the proposed permit activity.
Videos/photos of the fishing/harvesting activity at or around the project site.
What are the next steps after this information is provided to the Seattle District? 
The information provided to the Seattle District will be shared with the permit applicant.  The permit 
applicant will be afforded the opportunity to respond to the materials provided by the Tribes in 
support of a treaty right.  If the permit applicant chooses to respond, the response will be shared with 
the Tribe asserting the treaty right.  The scope of the USACE’s inquiry into an allegation of a treaty 
rights abrogation on the basis that the proposed project presents a physical bar of access to tribal 
U&A places, is focused upon an evaluation of the relevant and material facts submitted into the 
administrative record by the parties.  The USACE may also choose to seek information from public 
sources and third parties, such as fish conservation programs or applicable regulatory 
parameters.The end goal of this process is that the Seattle District obtains information necessary to 
complete our fact-specific analysis, and renders a decision that complies with all legal requirements 
and standards.  
If there is not sufficient evidence available to the USACE to demonstrate that DA authorization 
of the proposed activity would result in an impermissible abrogation of the treaty right because of 
the extent it physically impairs or obstructs the Tribe’s access to it’s U&A grounds and stations,, the 
USACE will continue to process the permit application in accordance with the agency’s 
implementing regulations.    The USACE will then next determine if there are other aspects of the Tribe’s 
objection  to evaluate, and may seek out further information from both the Tribe and applicant in regards to 
other aspects of the effects of the proposed permit application on the Tribe’s treaty right. The USACE will 
not conclude its public interest review until it has resolved any Tribal objection that authorizing the 
applicant’s proposal would be an abrogation of a reserved treaty right. If, however, the Seattle 
District determines a Tribal objection to DA authorization of the proposed activity has been raised 
and substantiated with project-specific information, the Seattle District may not authorize the 
proposed activity, in the absence of specific statutory authorization.  
Exhibit 1

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0257 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Jon Niermann, Chairman 
Emily Lindley, Commissioner 
Bobby Janecka, Commissioner 
Erin E. Chancellor, Interim Executive Director 
TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY 
Protecting Texas by Reducing and Preventing Pollution 
P.O. Box 13087   •   Austin, Texas 78711-3087   •   512-239-1000   •   tceq.texas.gov 
How is our customer service? tceq.texas.gov/customersurvey 
printed on recycled paper 
March 6, 2023 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Water Docket, Mail Code 28221T 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0797 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Subject: Federal Register, vol. 87, No. 232, Pages 74361 – 74379, December 5, 2022, U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency; Revised Definition of “Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights”; Notice of Proposed Rule; Availability of Public 
Comment. 
Dear Sir or Madame: 
The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) appreciates the opportunity to 
provide comments on the rule proposed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to 
revise existing federal water quality standards regulations to protect tribal reserved rights. The 
proposal was published on December 5, 2022 in the Federal Register, vol. 87, No. 232, Pages 
74361-74379.  TCEQ has concerns with federalism issues, including the appropriateness and 
scope of water availability within the proposal, and the limited state resources available to 
comply with the revised regulations, if finalized as proposed. TCEQ has also provided 
comments on the need for clarification of key terms, and has suggestions on pertinent topics 
that may impact state water quality standards programs. 
If you have questions concerning the enclosed comments, please contact Cari-Michel La Caille, 
Director of the Office of Water, at (512) 239-6479, or by e-mail at cari-
michel.lacaille@tceq.texas.gov. 
Sincerely, 
 
Erin E. Chancellor 
Interim Executive Director 
 
Attachment 
 
 
 
 
 

Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Comments on  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
Federal Register Vol. 87, No. 232 74361-74379 
 
Background 
 
On December 5, 2022, the U. S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published for 
public comment a proposed rule to revise existing federal regulations for water quality 
standards (WQS) under the Clean Water Act (CWA). The revisions include new 
requirements for states to specifically protect tribal reserved rights for federally-
recognized tribes. Tribal reserved rights are defined in the proposal as “any rights to 
aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either 
expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of 
Federal law.”  The proposed rule includes extensive new requirements for states to 
engage and coordinate with federally-recognized tribes, ensure ongoing WQS review 
processes consider, and state-adopted WQS specifically protect, tribal reserved rights. 
EPA will consult with federally-recognized tribes on the protectiveness of state-
adopted standards, and may disapprove or promulgate standards to meet the 
requirements of the CWA.   
Federal WQS regulations codified at Title 40 Code of Federal Regulations (40 CFR) Part 
131 provide the framework and requirements for states to develop and submit WQS 
for EPA approval. WQS adopted by states must be submitted for EPA approval prior to 
use in CWA activities such as: assessments for CWA Sections 305(b) and 303(d), total 
maximum daily loads, CWA Section 401 certifications, CWA Section 404 permits for 
dredged or fill material, and permitting of wastewater discharges. Currently, these 
regulations do not include requirements for states to consider and adopt WQS 
specifically for the protection of tribal reserved rights.   
  
TCEQ offers the following recommendations as outlined below. 
 
 
Comments Regarding Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
I.  Comments concerning scope and limitation of federal authority. 
A. The preamble and proposed rule revision should be revised to clearly 
indicate the scope and limitation of federal authority. Alternately, EPA may 
assume the responsibilities to implement these requirements as currently 
authorized.  EPA’s proposed revisions seem to delegate existing federal 
responsibilities to the states, by incorporating new requirements for states to 
consider and to protect treaty rights, rather than EPA, and circumvent 
established processes. Federal agencies (such as EPA) are required to consult 
with tribes on a government-government basis, pursuant to Executive Orders, 
Presidential  

TCEQ Comments  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights; 
Proposed Rule 
2 
 
 
memoranda, and other authorities, on policies that have tribal implications, 
including regulations or actions that have a substantial direct effect on one or 
more Indian tribes. In particular, the proposed requirements establish a 
separate process from the “Treatment as States” (TAS) policy established in 
accordance with Section 518 of the CWA. The TAS process established at CWA 
Section 518(e) authorizes EPA to treat an “Indian tribe as a State” for purposes 
of administering water quality standards. EPA’s implementing TAS policies 
recognize tribes as self-governed, self-determined, and sovereign. Although 
mechanisms exist for EPA to delegate such responsibility (upon authorization 
by tribal nations), as part of cooperative agreements, the proposed rulemaking 
unilaterally creates new requirements for states and circumvents these 
established processes. If the existing processes are ineffective, including 
existing federal authorities and authorizations, the preamble and rule should be 
revised to clearly explain why new requirements are needed, and clarify the 
scope and limitations of federal authority.    
Alternately, in lieu of rulemaking, EPA should assume these responsibilities to 
implement proposed requirements as part of their responsibilities already 
authorized by the U.S. Constitution and CWA, and memorialized in federal 
policies; including the identification of all tribal reserved rights. For example, 
EPA retains authority to implement the National Pollution Discharge Elimination 
System (NPDES) on tribal lands, regardless of a state’s delegation status to 
implement the NPDES program. EPA also has a primary role in consulting and 
coordinating with tribes. As stated in the preamble, EPA plans to coordinate 
with tribes during planned initial tribal consultation meetings with tribal 
reserved right holders, as specified in proposed 40 CFR §131.9(b), to determine 
whether state water quality standards protect applicable reserved rights. (See 
pages 74366 and 74367 in the FR.) Will EPA assume responsibility for 
identifying all tribal reserved rights in these consultation meetings, and then 
provide that detailed information to the appropriate states? Identifying and 
ensuring the protectiveness of tribal reserved rights, at the federal and tribal 
level, seems feasible given the existing federal regulatory framework. 
B. The definition of, and requirements to protect, tribal reserved rights needs 
clarification regarding their scope of applicability to water quality and water 
availability (quantity).  For example, does the definition of “tribal reserved 
rights” in proposed 40 CFR §131.3(r), as well as the proposed requirements to 
protect tribal reserved rights in 40 CFR §131.9, include sufficient water quantity 
to access and use fishing resources? Is water availability to access and use such 
resources within the scope of this regulation, if allocation of rights to state 
surface water is authorized and adjudicated within a state’s legal framework?  
1. If water availability is not explicitly included in the definition and 
protection of “tribal reserved rights,” the language should be revised to 
clearly allow for, and explain, the limits of the exclusion.  
2. If water availability is intended to be included in the definition and 
protection of “tribal reserved rights,” how is this new regulation 
consistent with Section 101(g) of the CWA, which clearly recognizes state 
primacy in allocation of state surface water? Including water availability  

TCEQ Comments  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights; 
Proposed Rule 
3 
 
 
has the potential to undermine Texas’ authority to allocate and manage 
its surface water resources.   
 
II.  Concerns regarding state resources to comply with the proposed requirements. 
A. Implementation of the new regulations will require legal and technical 
expertise that may not be available within existing state resources. TCEQ 
requests federal resources be made available to implement new 
requirements. If finalized as proposed, states will be required to identify any 
tribal reserved rights and document the scope, nature, and current and past use 
of the tribal reserved rights as informed by the right holders, as well as ensure 
WQS adopted by states are protective of tribal reserved rights. Specific legal and 
technical expertise will be needed to comply with these requirements, and to 
facilitate engagement and coordination with tribal right holders. Such expertise 
is not readily available within existing and limited state resources.  
 
Since the scope of this proposed regulation includes consideration of only 
federal sources of law and policies (statutes, treaties, executive orders, etc.), EPA 
should ensure federal resources to coordinate and implement these provisions 
are available to states, particularly the identification of any and all applicable 
tribal reserved rights, and other pertinent information to identify and apply 
these rights for purposes of water quality standards. Such resources may be 
available within the EPA’s American Indian Environmental Office, and each EPA 
Region’s Tribal Program, including Regional Tribal Operations Committees. It is 
foreseeable that EPA could lead regional consultation meetings with tribes, and 
also invite state representatives, so that all parties can hear directly from the 
tribes on what issues need to be addressed related to tribal reserved rights. At a 
minimum, TCEQ requests EPA identify the aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent 
resources to be considered, using their existing federal authority. Without direct 
consultation with tribes (which is the purview of EPA), states cannot know which 
specific aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources are important to specific 
tribes. Following EPA’s tribal consultation, a list of specific resources should be 
developed and provided to states in a timely manner to facilitate 
implementation of the rule.  
B. While EPA has emphasized they will work early and often with both tribes 
and states, it appears that the bulk of EPA’s consultation with tribes will 
occur without state participation, and after the state has adopted water 
quality standards revisions and submitted a rule package to EPA for review 
and approval.  EPA coordination with both states and tribes to identify any 
major issues with the state’s approach to protecting tribal rights should occur 
earlier in the rule revision process to help ensure that the state adopted 
revisions will meet tribal expectations and garner EPA approval. Coordination 
earlier, rather than after adoption, will help ensure scarce state and tribal 
resources are used most efficiently and effectively. Additionally, it is unclear 
how state participation and representation will be incorporated into EPA’s tribal 
consultation program. 

TCEQ Comments  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights; 
Proposed Rule 
4 
 
 
C. EPA’s economic analysis underestimates the burdens and costs to states. EPA 
has not identified the realm of applicable tribal reserved rights in each state. 
Thus, the administrative burden and cost of implementing these rules is 
unknown and not appropriately considered in the proposed economic analysis. 
Additionally, EPA did not take into consideration the costs associated with the 
engagement and completion of tribal coordination by states to inform required 
revisions. Some of these uncertainties are reflected in Table 2-3 of EPA’s 
Economic Analysis for Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights (Proposed Rule), published to accompany the rule 
proposal, and with EPA’s inability to estimate costs to regulated entities. The 
costs of compliance by both states and regulated entities should be better-
estimated and quantified, the Economic Analysis revised accordingly, and 
finalization of the rule delayed until uncertainties are addressed.   
 
III.  Requests for clarity of key terms, and coordination within the existing regulatory 
framework to administer water quality standards.  
A. TCEQ requests EPA better-define or provide additional guidance regarding 
what is a “reasonably anticipated future use” and how to determine “heritage 
fish consumption rates.”  
Page 74367 of the rule preamble indicates “the regulation is intended to result 
in WQS that protect reasonably anticipated future uses, taking into account 
factors that may have substantially altered a waterbody,” however, there is no 
explicit requirement in revised 40 CFR Part 131 regarding “reasonably 
anticipated future uses.”  Current regulations require states to consider existing 
uses, thus the concept of “reasonably anticipated future uses” is not currently 
codified. EPA must clearly define this concept in rule (as “existing uses” are 
codified), or provide additional detailed guidance to determine and apply a 
“reasonably anticipated future use.” This clarification is needed particularly 
considering the current requirements to protect existing uses and water quality 
in accordance with 40 CFR Part 131. 
Additionally, in the rule preamble, EPA endeavors to ensure the level of water 
quality necessary to determine tribal resources “largely mirror the process 
states already follow,” and provide heritage fish consumption rates as an 
example. Although a footnote to EPA’s 2016 Guidance for Conducting Fish 
Consumption Surveys is provided in the preamble, the rule does not establish 
any nationally applicable thresholds. States without prior experience 
determining heritage rates and levels of suppression will encounter substantial  
uncertainty when attempting to comply with the new requirements, without 
additional clarification.     
 
B. TCEQ requests EPA clarify if the requirement of 40 CFR §131.9(a)(1) to 
protect the “exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality 
or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource” extends to other 
water quality standards requirements. These include requirements specified in 

TCEQ Comments  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights; 
Proposed Rule 
5 
 
40 CFR §131.10(g) regarding designation and removal of uses; 40 CFR 
§131.12(a)(2)  
 
regarding antidegradation and allowances for the lowering of water quality; and 
40 CFR §131.13 and 40 CFR §131.14 regarding general policies including mixing 
zones,  
low-flows and federal variances. Proposal of these revisions involving 
suppression of water quality or availability, without fully considering and 
anticipating impacts to other existing federal regulations that comprise the 
framework and implementation of the water quality standards program, is 
premature and may result in unintended conflict and confusion. 
C. TCEQ requests EPA clarify how the proposed protections of tribal reserved 
rights should be coordinated with existing provisions regarding Use 
Attainability Analyses and Use and Value Demonstrations for non-Section 
101(a)(2) uses. On page 74372 of the preamble, EPA requests comment on 
whether and how states can revise designated uses, while also ensuring the 
protection of tribal reserved resources. In response to that question, TCEQ 
recommends tribal reserved rights be considered in a manner consistent with 
other existing uses to ensure proposed protections for tribal reserved rights are 
consistent, and do not conflict with, the existing regulatory framework of water 
quality standards. 
Revision of designated uses to ensure compliance with the Section 101(a)(2) goal 
of fishable -swimmable, “wherever attainable” is an essential component of 
water quality standards, and the overall management of surface water quality in 
accordance with the goals of the CWA. EPA must clarify how the proposed 
revisions can be coordinated with current procedures for revising existing uses, 
the milestone upon which the federal framework is based. If the proposed 
revisions cannot be coordinated with current provisions and existing uses, then 
it is doubtful the revisions can be appropriately administered within existing 
water quality standards programs.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0169 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
To whom so ever it may concern
The requirements involve ensuring that the WQS are protective of tribal reserved rights, 
including the rights to fish, hunt, and gather, as well as other cultural and spiritual uses of the 
waters. The requirements also typically include provisions for meaningful tribal consultation and 
participation in the WQS development process. 
In addition, some states have adopted specific standards to protect the quality of water used by 
tribes for traditional and cultural purposes. In some states, the WQS regulatory revisions may 
also include special provisions designed to recognize tribal treaty and trust obligations, such as 
the obligation to provide safe drinking water for tribal members. Additionally, the regulatory 
revisions may include provisions that recognize the unique status of tribal governments and 
provide for tribal consultation and participation in WQS implementation, monitoring, and 
enforcement activities. Finally, some WQS regulatory revisions may provide for special 
procedures to ensure that tribal water quality is adequately protected and that any violations of 
tribal water quality standards are promptly addressed. 
These special procedures may include requirements to provide tribal members with timely notice 
of any water quality violations and/or to ensure that environmental enforcement actions are taken 
against violators of tribal water quality standards. Overall, the purpose of WQS regulatory 
revisions is to ensure that tribal reserved rights are adequately protected and that the water 
quality standards established by states are consistent with the special relationship between tribes 
and the federal government.
With Regards,
Saranya Madhira and Madison Christianson

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0171 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
1 
 
February 17, 2023 
 
Ms. Jennifer Brundage 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Water 
Standards and Health Protection Division (4305T) 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
Submitted via email and www.regulations.gov  
Re:  
Request for Comment Deadline Extension on Environmental Protection Agency’s 
(EPA) Proposed Rule, “Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. 74361-74379 (Dec. 5, 2022). 
 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
 
The undersigned organizations respectfully request an extension of the comment period for 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed rule, “Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022). As 
discussed below, the proposal lacks the relevant information needed to understand its full scope and 
raises complex legal and policy issues that warrant careful evaluation by parties that may be 
impacted. We thereby ask EPA to keep the comment period open until 60 days after it publishes a 
supplemental notice containing the level of information necessary to allow affected businesses, 
states, other stakeholders, and the general public to provide meaningful comments on this important 
undertaking. Alternatively, we urge the agency to extend the comment deadline by at least 90 days 
to June 5, 2023.  
 
Our coalition is comprised of associations representing the broad economy, including 
agriculture, construction, energy, manufacturing, and mining. Our members  are essential to 
economic prosperity and achieving a better quality of life, and are committed to sustainability, 
environmental stewardship, and public health. We have a direct and substantial interest in this 
rulemaking, as our member companies operate pursuant to the Clean Water Act (CWA) and own or 
operate facilities in states that could be required to revise water quality standards (WQS) in 
response to this rulemaking.  
 
The agency has proposed to revise its WQS regulations at 40 CFR Part 131 to explicitly 
require states to protect Tribal reserved rights, which are defined broadly in the proposal as “any 
rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by Tribes, either expressly or 
implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of Federal law.” Id. at 74378 
(emphasis added). The coalition is mindful and respectful of Tribal sovereignty and supports 
collaboration and meaningful engagement between the regulated community, Tribes, and 
indigenous communities. 
 
However, this proposal is missing key information that would allow stakeholders to 
understand its scope and potential impacts. For example, the agency has not provided any 
information about the possible universe of treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of 

2 
 
federal law that could create any rights reserved or held by Tribes explicitly or implicitly. Knowing 
this universe of potentially applicable bodies of law is fundamental to respond to the agency’s 
request for comment. After review of the rulemaking docket, we understand not only that there is no 
central repository to identify Tribal reserved rights but also that EPA does not intend to gather this 
information as part of this rulemaking effort.1 EPA has also acknowledged that they did not attempt 
to gather information about the impacts on the regulated community that would arise from the 
proposed regulations.  
 
While we understand the enormity of such a task, EPA and its federal agency partners are 
best positioned to collect and disseminate this information. This burden cannot be foisted upon or 
abdicated to the states or other stakeholders. The ability to provide meaningful comments is also 
hampered by the lack of clarity around key definitions and concepts that are critical to interpreting 
the scope of the proposal. For example, the term “aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources,” 
which is key to understanding the scope of the proposed regulations, is not defined in the proposal.   
 
Without this foundational information, this rulemaking effort is premature, and EPA should 
engage stakeholders in a thoughtful and comprehensive approach to evaluate impacts, costs, and 
benefits.2 We therefore respectfully ask EPA to keep the comment period open until 60 days after 
the agency provides states, Tribes, and the public with adequate information on the Tribal reserved 
rights that could be implicated in each state, including but not limited to a comprehensive listing of 
applicable treaties, statutes, executive orders, and other sources of federal law. Such information is 
required to discharge the agency’s obligations under the CWA and the Administrative Procedure 
Act. At all events, we urge the agency to extend the comment deadline by at least 90 days to June 5, 
2023.  
 
Thank you for consideration of our request and for your attention to this important matter. 
Please reach out if you have any questions in the meantime.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
American Exploration & Mining Association 
American Forest & Paper Association 
American Petroleum Institute 
Essential Minerals Association  
National Association of Home Builders 
National Association of Manufacturers 
National Mining Association 
National Oilseed Processors Association  
The Fertilizer Institute 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce 
 
 
1 E-mail exchanges between EPA and the Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality, Aug. 2021. Document ID 
EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0024. Available at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0024.  
2 This rulemaking effort also is premature given EPA’s complementary proposal to establish baseline WQS for waters 
on Indian reservations, which was sent to the Office of Management and Budget on Jan. 10, 2023 for interagency 
review and is anticipated for release in the coming months.  

3 
 
 Cc: Assistant Administrator Radhika Fox 
       Assistant Administrator Jane Nishida

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0248 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Deborah A. Sivas 
Matthew J. Sanders 
Stephanie L. Safdi 
Environmental Law Clinic 
Mills Legal Clinic at Stanford Law 
School 
 
Crown Quadrangle 
559 Nathan Abbott Way 
Stanford, CA 94305-8610 
Tel 
650 497.9443 
dsivas@stanford.edu 
matthewjsanders@stanford.edu 
ssafdi@stanford.edu 
Community Law  ❖  Criminal Defense  ❖  Environmental Law  ❖  Immigrants' Rights 
International Human Rights and Conflict Resolution  ❖  Juelsgaard Intellectual Property and Innovation 
Organizations and Transactions  ❖  Religious Liberty  ❖  Supreme Court Litigation  ❖  Youth and Education Law Project 
 
 
March 6, 2023 
Via Electronic Submission 
 
Environmental Protection Agency 
 
 
Re: 
Comments on Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
 
Submitted by Shingle Springs Band of Miwok Indians, Winnemem Wintu Tribe, and Save 
California Salmon 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
The Shingle Springs Band of Miwok Indians, Winnemem Wintu Tribe, and Save 
California Salmon respectfully submit this comment on the Proposed Rule by the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) to revise the Federal Clean Water Act (“CWA”) 
water quality standards regulations to protect tribal reserved rights (“Proposed Rule”).  We write 
in strong support of EPA’s recognition that tribal reserved rights may be impaired by water 
quality standards that fail to, for instance, ensure sufficient instream flows to protect native 
fisheries and other riparian resources.  And we write in strong support of EPA’s efforts through 
the Proposed Rule to clarify its position that water quality standards must account for and protect 
tribal reserved rights, and to create a consistent process for effecting such protections.  At the 
same time, as California tribes, and advocates for California tribes, that were cheated by the state 
and federal governments out of treaty reservations, we have significant concerns about the 
shortcomings of the Proposed Rule for many California tribes.  We therefore also write to urge 
EPA to take a more expansive approach to protecting and promoting tribes’ beneficial uses and 
stewardship of water and riparian resources. 
 
 
As discussed below, the Proposed Rule falls short for tribes like the Winnemem Wintu 
and Shingle Springs Band of Miwok Indians, who were signatories to unratified treaties.  The 
ongoing injustice that the federal government’s duplicity wrought is brought into stark relief as 
those with recognized reserved rights appropriately gain protections, while others are left behind.  
The federal government’s trust responsibilities toward tribes, and particularly toward California 
tribes in light of its role in negating their treaty reservations, should sweep more broadly. 
 
 
To address these issues, we start by recounting the history of broken treaty promises that 
forms the foundation on which this Proposed Rule sits for California tribes.  We urge EPA to 
more fully engage with this history.  Second, we encourage EPA to clarify that any doubts 
regarding the scope of reserved rights for purposes of establishing water quality standards will be 

March 6, 2023 
Page 2 
 
resolved in favor of tribes, consistent with EPA’s fiduciary obligations toward tribes, canons of 
Federal Indian law, and recognition of challenges and resource limitations that tribes will face in 
demonstrating their reserved rights in this venue.  For similar reasons, we urge EPA to ensure 
that decisions on reserved rights for purposes of establishing water quality standards do not 
prejudice efforts by tribes to adjudicate, quantify, or enforce their reserved rights more generally.  
Finally, we ask that EPA exercise its trust responsibilities toward all tribes, including California 
tribes without federal recognition, by acknowledging the federal government’s responsibility 
toward tribes who were deceived by its refusals to ratify the California treaties and by advancing 
designation and protection of tribal beneficial uses. 
 
COMMENTING PARTIES 
 
The Shingle Springs Band of Miwok Indians are Indigenous Peoples of the Sacramento 
Valley in Northern California.  Waterways of the Sacramento-San Joaquin River Delta (“Delta”) 
– including the Sacramento, American, Feather, Bear, and Cosumnes Rivers – are the lifeblood 
of the Tribe.  The Tribe has stewarded and utilized resources from these rivers for sustenance, 
medicine, transportation, ceremony, clothing, and shelter, among other cultural and subsistence 
uses, since time immemorial.1   
 
The 600 present-day members of the Shingle Springs Band of Miwok Indians are 
descendants of the Miwok and Southern Nisenan Indians who thrived in California’s fertile 
Central Valley for thousands of years before contact with Europeans.  The Tribe is also 
descended from ten native Hawaiians who were forcibly brought to Nisenan territory in 1839 by 
John Sutter, a Swiss land baron who enslaved hundreds of Indigenous people to power his nearly 
50,000-acre ranch in the Sacramento Valley.  The Tribe’s deep connection to Delta waterways 
was severed when its members were forced from their ancestral villages through colonization, 
disease, state-sponsored violence, and privatization of land, among other forms of dispossession.  
 
The Secretary of the Interior purchased the 160-acre Shingle Springs Rancheria east of 
Sacramento in El Dorado County and placed it into trust for the displaced Tribe in 1920. 
However, the landlocked and roadless Rancheria remained inaccessible to the Tribe for decades. 
The Rancheria is also largely devoid of usable surface water resources and far from the Delta 
waterways that define the Tribe’s way of life.  
 
The Tribe’s removal from ancestral waterways has eroded its identity, traditional 
knowledge, and cultural practices.  In recent years, the Tribe has been returning to the Delta’s 
waterways and working to restore connections to cultural resources and traditional ways of life. 
In 2020, the Tribe purchased a small tract of land at its ancestral village site in Verona, where the 
Feather River meets the Sacramento River.  Yet, despite regaining this limited riparian access to 
ancestral waterways, the degraded condition of the Delta is impeding the Tribe’s long-sought 
reconnection.  For example, traditional riparian cultural resources – like tule, a long grassy plant 
 
1 Shingle Springs Band of Miwok Indians et al., Title VI Complaint and Petition for Rulemaking 
for Promulgation of Bay-Delta Water Quality Standards at Exhibit E, Attachment B, Decl. of 
Malissa Tayaba ¶ 2 (Dec. 16, 2022), https://www.restorethedelta.org/wp-content/uploads/2022-
12-16-Bay-Delta-Complaint-and-Petition.pdf (“Decl. of Malissa Tayaba”). 

March 6, 2023 
Page 3 
 
that once lined the waterways and from which the Tribe fashioned fishing boats, regalia, and 
other important cultural and subsistence implements – either no longer exist or are largely 
unsuitable for use because of the polluted state of the water.   
 
 
The Winnemem Wintu are a California Tribe whose identity and existence are 
intertwined with the headwaters of the Delta.  In the Winnemem language, “Winnemem Wintu” 
translates to Middle Water People, reflecting the Tribe’s identification with its ancestral 
homelands along the McCloud River between the Sacramento and Pit Rivers.  These waters have 
sustained the life and spirituality of the Tribe since time immemorial.2 
 
The Nur, or Chinook salmon, which once flourished in these waterways, are the source of 
Winnemem Wintu culture and identity.  In the Tribe’s creation story, the Winnemem Wintu were 
helpless and could not speak when they were brought forth by the Creator from a sacred spring 
on Mt. Shasta.  The Nur took pity on the Winnemem Wintu and gave their voice to the Tribe.  In 
return, the Winnemem Wintu promised to always speak for the Nur.  Side by side, the 
Winnemem Wintu and the Nur have depended on each other for thousands of years – the 
Winnemem speaking for, caring for, and endeavoring to protect the salmon, and the salmon 
giving themselves to the Winnemem to provide sustenance throughout the year.  Ceremonies, 
songs, dances, and prayers about the relationship between the Nur and the Winnemem Wintu are 
the fabric of Winnemem Wintu culture, religion, and spirituality.  
 
Excessive appropriation of Delta water resources has contributed to the near extinction of 
Chinook salmon, thereby threatening the continued existence of the Winnemem Wintu as a 
People.  This existential threat layers on top of centuries of state-supported campaigns and 
projects to remove the Winnemem Wintu from their historic homelands and divest them of their 
relationship to the water.  These efforts culminated in the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation’s 
construction of the Shasta Dam in the 1930s and 40s as part of the federal Central Valley Project.  
The dam flooded over 90 percent of the Winnemem Wintu’s historical village sites, sacred sites, 
burial sites, and cultural gathering sites and blocked the Nur from migrating into the Delta 
headwaters to spawn.  In the words of the Tribe’s Chief, Caleen Sisk:  “We used to be 20,000 
people along the river and we’re dwindling out like the salmon.  We only have 126 members of 
the Tribe left and so if the salmon are going extinct, we can only guess that so will we.”  
 
 
Save California Salmon is a 501(c)(3) organization dedicated to restoring clean and 
plentiful flows and fish habitat, removing dams, and improving water quality throughout 
Northern California watersheds so that the region’s fish-dependent tribes and communities can 
thrive.  Save California Salmon is also dedicated to fighting emergent threats on rivers, such as 
new dams, diversions, and pipelines, and empowering communities affected by diversions and 
poor water management to fight for rivers and salmon.  
 
Save California Salmon works with over a dozen California tribes with an interest in 
water quality and fisheries-related decisions, as well as with tribal members directly.  Save 
California Salmon’s advisory board is chiefly comprised of leaders and members of tribes from 
the Northern California watersheds in which the organization works – including the Winnemem 
 
2 Id. at Exhibit E, Attachment B, Decl. of Gary Mulcahy (“Decl. of Gary Mulcahy”).  

March 6, 2023 
Page 4 
 
Wintu Tribe and Shingle Springs Band of Miwok Indians, as well as the Hoopa Valley Tribe, 
Karuk Tribe, Pit River Tribe, Wiyot Tribe, Blue Lake Rancheria, Mechoopda Indian Tribe, and 
the Yurok Tribe – and who depend on healthy and sustainable surface water flows for spiritual, 
cultural, subsistence, and recreational purposes and for satisfaction of reserved rights. 
 
DISCUSSION 
 
A. For California tribes, the Proposed Rule rests on a foundation of broken treaty 
promises and dispossession. 
 
The Proposed Rule would help to ensure that water quality standards under the CWA 
protect aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources reserved to tribes through treaties, statutes, 
executive orders, or other sources of Federal law.  But the Proposed Rule has a major limitation: 
“tribes without federally reserved rights to aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources will not be 
directly impacted by this rulemaking.”3  As EPA acknowledges, tribes whose interests are left 
out of the Proposed Rule include those who “negotiated treaties with the U.S. government that 
were not ratified.”4  This passing reference to unratified treaties does not do justice to the 
interests of the many California tribes who were deprived of their treaty reserved rights through 
federal and state deception. 
 
 Between 1851 and 1852, 139 California tribes were compelled to sign 18 treaties that 
would have ceded the tribes’ ancestral lands in exchange for reservations, and the benefits that 
flowed from them, including reserved water rights.5   The lands reserved to the tribes under the 
treaties encompassed 7.5 million acres – upwards of seven percent of the modern state of 
California.6  The Winnemem Wintu Tribe, for instance, signed a Treaty of Peace and Friendship 
on August 16, 1851, at Reading’s Ranch in Cottonwood, California.7  This treaty promised a 25-
square-mile reservation comprising land along the Pit, McCloud, and Sacramento Rivers.8   
 
Had these treaties been ratified, they would have guaranteed California tribes extensive 
reserved rights to water and aquatic resources.  But the federal government broke its promises.  
Following objections from California’s legislature and industry that the treaties would reserve 
valuable mineral estate and agricultural lands to the tribes, the U.S. Senate refused to ratify the 
treaties and instead placed the treaties and related documents “under an injunction of secrecy” 
 
3 Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 
74361, 74364, 74378 (Dec. 5, 2022) (“Proposed Rule”). 
4 Id. at 74364. 
5 The Advisory Council on California Indian Policy, The ACCIP Historical Overview Report: 
The Special Circumstances of California Indians 5 (1997), 
https://cthcupdates.files.wordpress.com/2021/05/accip-historical-overview-report-1.pdf (“ACCIP 
Historical Overview Report”). 
6 See National Park Service, A History of American Indians in California: 1849-1879, 
https://www.nps.gov/parkhistory/online_books/5views/5views1c.htm; cf. ACCIP Historical 
Overview Report at 5 (reporting that treaties would have retained 8.5 million acres for the tribes). 
7 Decl. of Gary Mulcahy at ¶ 9. 
8 Id. 

March 6, 2023 
Page 5 
 
for over fifty years.9  In the words of historian Benjamin Madley, the “eighteen treaties 
comprised evidence related to a deceitful crime of vast proportions and documented a mass 
betrayal” by the federal government toward California tribes.10    
 
Although many of the signatory tribes were unaware that the treaties had not been ratified 
and their inherent title to the lands remained intact, state and federal officials nonetheless acted 
as if the lands had been ceded, opening them up for settlement by non-Natives without 
establishing the reservations.11  When Natives who had left their ancestral lands for reservations 
returned after the reservations were nullified by the U.S. Senate, they found that their lands had 
been appropriated.12   The government’s duplicity rendered Native tribes “landless”13 and robbed 
them of federal reserved rights that would have adhered to the treaty reservations.14  At the same 
time, state-sponsored murders of tribal members together with state and federal laws – like the 
federal Land Claims Act – furthered dispossession and removal of California tribes from their 
ancestral lands.15 
 
 
Over fifty years later, a clerk in the Senate Archives uncovered the “lost” California 
treaties, leading to federal investigations of the condition of tribes in the state.  Unsurprisingly, 
many were struggling to survive on “unusable lands abandoned by settlers.”16  In response to the 
investigations, Congress appropriated money to purchase land for California tribes.  The 
resulting rancherias “did provide a refuge” for some tribes, but “the main goal of the land 
acquisition program – to provide homeless California Indians with a secure and usable land base 
– was not realized in most cases.”17  Rancherias were often located in rocky and inhospitable 
 
9 ACCIP Historical Overview Report at 5; see also National Park Service, A History of American 
Indians in California (explaining that the California State Senate objected that the treaties 
“committed an error in assigning large portions of the richest mineral and agricultural lands to 
the Indians, who did not appreciate the land’s value”). 
10 Benjamin Madley, An American Genocide: The United States and the Californian Indian 
Catastrophe, 1846-1873 at 168 (2017); see also id. at 14 (recording that state and federal 
“lawmakers played a key role in th[e] genocide” against Native Californians “by stripping them 
of legal rights, by making anti-Indian crimes extremely difficult to prosecute, and by refusing to 
ratify treaties signed by federal agencies and California Indian leaders that could have restrained 
the violence”). 
11 ACCIP Historical Overview Report at 5; see also Madley, An American Genocide at 211. 
12 Madley, An American Genocide at 212. 
13 ACCIP Historical Overview Report at 7. 
14 Madley, An American Genocide at 168. 
15 See id. at 234 (recounting that by the mid-1850s, “[a] new era of increasingly lethal state-
sponsored Indian killing had begun as the US government, state legislators, militiamen, and 
vigilantes perfected the killing machine”); ACCIP Historical Overview Report at 5 (detailing the 
role of the Land Claims Act of March 3, 1851 in denying tribes’ legal interests in ancestral 
lands); An Act to Ascertain and Settle the Land Claims in the State of California, 9 Stat. 631, 
632-33 (1851). 
16 ACCIP Historical Overview Report at 11. 
17 Id. at 12. 

March 6, 2023 
Page 6 
 
land with scant water resources and removed from tribal homelands.18  For example, the Shingle 
Springs Rancheria lies 40 miles away from Pusune, a historic tribal village at the confluence of 
the Sacramento and American Rivers.19  Pusune was a bustling “center of life,” with the rivers 
serving as the “grocery store” for the tribe and its “source of . . . spiritual and religious practice, 
providing materials for traditional regalia, cultural practices, and sites for ceremony.”20  In 
contrast, on the Shingle Springs Rancheria, the only surface water comes from two ephemeral 
streams that are dry except for short periods of time following precipitation.21 
 
Some tribes, including the Winnemem Wintu, were never accorded rancherias at all.   
 
This history does not take away from the significant benefits that will accrue to tribes 
holding federal reserved rights under the Proposed Rule; rather, it shows that those benefits do 
not fully protect the interests of many California tribes whose reserved rights were diminished by 
government action.  
 
B. EPA should ensure that implementation of the Proposed Rule adequately protects 
tribes’ interests and ability to assert reserved rights.  
 
The Proposed Rule raises important implementation questions, particularly for tribes like 
Shingle Springs Band of Miwok Indians, whose reserved rights have not been subject to prior 
adjudication.  The Proposed Rule is explicit that “tribal reserved rights means any rights to 
aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or 
implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of Federal law” and that 
“instruments other than treaties may also reserve tribal rights, with equally binding effect.”22  
This includes rights created by executive order or legislation establishing reservations or 
rancherias in California.   
 
Where reserved rights are implicit – that is, where they do not explicitly describe “rights 
to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources” such as the “right to fish in [tribes’] usual and 
accustomed areas” – the extent of those reserved rights and the protections that adhere to them 
may be less clear.23  EPA must take pains to ensure that any ambiguities or failures by drafters to 
make reserved rights explicit do not work against tribes in establishment of adequately protective 
water quality standards. 
 
Three important points should weigh on determinations of the extent of implied tribal 
reserved rights for purposes of establishing water quality standards under the CWA.  First, the 
 
18 Id. at 12. 
19 Decl. of Malissa Tayaba at ¶ 11. 
20 Id. at ¶ 10. 
21 Title VI Complaint and Petition for Rulemaking, Attachment F at 26. 
22 Proposed Rule at 74363, 74364 & n.22 (noting that in Menominee Tribe of Indians v. U.S., the 
Supreme Court found that while “nothing was said in the 1854 treaty about hunting and fishing 
rights,” such rights were implied because the treaty phrase “to be held as Indian lands are held” 
including the right to fish and hunt”) 
23 See Id. at 74363, 74364 n.26. 

March 6, 2023 
Page 7 
 
“Indian canons of construction” require that “any ambiguities are to be resolved in [tribes’] 
favor,” including in the context of “determining the scope of tribes’ rights under statutes or 
executive orders setting aside land for tribes.”24  These canons should apply equally to any 
consideration of tribal reserved rights under the CWA. 
 
Second, states and the federal government should be cognizant of power dynamics and 
resource constraints facing many tribes in presenting and asserting reserved rights in water 
quality standard proceedings.  Agencies must take care to ensure careful, early, and 
comprehensive notification and outreach to tribes.  And they must follow up to provide tribes 
with resources and adequate consultation and process to ensure their voices will be heard and 
their interests centered in decision-making.   
 
Third, EPA should be clear that such determinations will not be construed to have any 
preclusive effect on or otherwise prejudice subsequent efforts by tribes to obtain recognition of 
reserved rights, including but not limited to efforts to quantify reserved water (or “Winters”) 
rights.  This is essential because, even with implementation of measures for tribal inclusion in 
water quality standard proceedings discussed above, not all tribes will be able to fully participate 
nor be accorded full due process in such proceedings, and their interests in reserved rights should 
not be prejudiced by these deficiencies. 
 
C. EPA should exercise its trust responsibility to acknowledge and protect tribal 
beneficial uses of water beyond the scope of reserved rights. 
 
The federal government’s general trust responsibility toward tribes “has been the 
cornerstone of federal-Indian relations since the founding of the American republic,” and “exists 
between the United States and all Indian people.”25  The distinction between federally recognized 
and non-federally recognized tribes “often seems to be made out of a habitual reluctance to 
assume broader responsibility, even when Congress intends that agencies do so.”26  Efforts to 
restrict benefits on the basis of federal recognition may “constitute[] a breach of trust between 
the government and the California Indians.”27 
 
In light of its trust responsibility toward all tribes, EPA should build on this Proposed 
Rule by exercising its authority to protect the rights and interests of tribes in water, aquatic 
resources, and aquatic-dependent resources, even when those rights and interests fall outside of 
recognized tribal reserved rights.28  While EPA acknowledges that “this rulemaking does not 
address all obstacles to the full exercise of [non-federally reserved rights]” and indicates that it 
 
24 Proposed Rule at 74364 & n.17. 
25 The Advisory Council on California Indian Policy, The ACCIP Trust and Natural Resources 
Report 6, 8 (1997). 
26 Id. at 8. 
27 See id. at 9. 
28 Proposed Rule at 74378 (asserting that “tribes without aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources 
will not be directly impacted by this rulemaking”). 

March 6, 2023 
Page 8 
 
“will continue to work with states and tribes” to protect those rights, we urge EPA to take the 
following concrete steps toward that end.29 
 
First, the final rule should do more to acknowledge the history of broken treaties outlined 
above, in which the federal government deceived tribes out of both their ancestral lands and the 
lands and reserved rights to which they were entitled under these federal instruments.  Currently, 
this history is relegated to a hollow statement that “some tribes negotiated treaties with the U.S. 
government that were not ratified,” citing to a Ninth Circuit decision holding that such treaties 
carry no legal effect.30  Without more, this treatment minimizes the government’s role in that 
deception and dispossession, and its responsibility to rectify it. 
 
Second, EPA should substantively act to mitigate these harms by formalizing protections 
for non-recognized tribes.  EPA suggests that “many of the coordination and collaboration 
processes that will be developed to implement this rule will also lead to better protection of 
aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources not referenced in treaties and similar instruments 
because this rulemaking aims to facilitate greater coordination between state and tribal 
governments.”31  However, the experience of many tribes, including the Shingle Springs Band of 
Miwok Indians and the Winnemem Wintu Tribe, with state agencies provides reason to be 
skeptical that this aspiration of improved state protection of tribal resources will be realized 
absent strict legal requirement.32  Instead of pursuing meaningful consultation with tribes to 
affirmatively protect their water-related cultural resources and uses, states including California 
have demonstrated a recurring practice of excluding tribes from decision-making processes and 
coordinating with them only as a check-the-box exercise.33  In addition, the California State 
Water Resources Control Board has taken an expansive view of the degree to which tribal water 
rights, including reserved rights, as well as traditional cultural practices have been “lost.”34  In 
reality, California tribes have persevered in the face of major obstacles in maintaining cultural, 
spiritual, and subsistence practices and in asserting reserved rights.35  This disconnect further 
demonstrates the importance of EPA exercising its trust responsibility to dignify and protect 
those rights and interests. 
 
Third, we urge EPA to use its authority under the Clean Water Act to advance 
designation and protection of Tribal Beneficial Uses (“TBUs”).  TBUs have been defined as “an 
array of beneficial uses including, but not limited to: recreation; navigation; and preservation and 
 
29 Id. 
30 Id. at 74364 & n.20. 
31 Id. at 74378. 
32 See generally, Title VI Complaint and Petition for Rulemaking at 34. 
33 See Title VI Complaint and Petition for Rulemaking at 34. 
34 See Cal. State Water Res. Control Bd., Resolution No. 2021-0050 at 3 (2021) (suggesting that 
“[h]istorical land seizures, broken promises related to federal treaty rights, and failures to 
recognize and protect federal reserved rights have resulted in the loss of associated water rights 
and other natural resources of value, as well as cultural, spiritual, and subsistence traditions that 
Native American people have practiced since time immemorial.”) 
35 Decl. of Malissa Tayaba; Decl. of Gary Mulcahy. 

March 6, 2023 
Page 9 
 
enhancement of fish, wildlife, and other aquatic resources or preserves.”36  This includes, in 
California, tribal subsistence fishing and tribal tradition and culture.37   
 
Specific designation of TBUs is vital for protecting tribal uses of waterways.  As the 
Proposed Rule explains, “[a]n advantage to establishing designated uses that explicitly recognize 
specific tribal reserved rights is that it is a transparent way to identify where those rights apply 
and how they are protected.”38  Explicit designation would dignify and protect tribal practices 
such as Winnemem Wintu water blessings, which involve “cupping water in our hands from the 
river and placing it on our heads and hearts.”39  Importantly, designation of TBUs recognizes and 
requires protection of subsistence, cultural, ceremonial, spiritual, and other important uses of 
water bodies and aquatic resources exercised by any tribe, including those without recognized 
reserved rights or federal recognition. 
 
Despite their importance in advancing recognition of tribal interests and restoring and 
protecting tribes’ deep and enduring relationship to the water, TBUs have been designated in 
only a handful of states, and even those have suffered from inconsistent implementation.  In 
California, the State Water Board, which oversees the codification of beneficial uses for the Bay-
Delta, has thus far refused to designate TBUs in that water quality control plan – despite existing 
definitions adopted by the state, codification by regional water boards, and ample evidence of 
tribal beneficial uses exercised by Delta tribes like the Shingle Springs Band of Miwok Indians.40  
The situation in the Bay-Delta illustrates the inconsistency, confusion, and resistance that 
prevents widespread adoption of TBUs under the current system.   
 
EPA is in a unique position to help dismantle these barriers.  We urge EPA to ensure that 
state water quality criteria account for TBUs, including by denying state water quality plans that 
fail to consider TBU designations, by designating TBUs itself where states like California fail to 
do so, and by providing guidance and/or exercising its rulemaking authority to ensure more 
consistent designations. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
 
The Proposed Rule represents an important step toward protecting tribal reserved water 
rights, and we strongly support the thrust of the Proposed Rule.  But we ask EPA to build on this 
important step by affirmatively protecting the interests of tribes that are not contemplated by this 
rulemaking, including those whose reserved treaty rights have been limited through deceptive 
federal action. 
 
 
36 Cal. State Water Res. Control Bd., Tribal Beneficial Uses Fact Sheet (2020), 
https://www.waterboards.ca.gov/tribal_affairs/docs/tbu_fact_sheet_v04.pdf. 
37 Adriana Renteria, Cal. State Water Res. Control Bd., Tribal Beneficial Uses: California 
Update (Jan. 26, 2022), https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-02/winter-rtoc-2022-
presentation-tribal-beneficial-uses-water-boards.pdf. 
38 Proposed Rule at 74371. 
39 Decl. of Gary Mulcahy at ¶ 32. 
40 See Title VI Complaint and Petition for Rulemaking at 54. 

March 6, 2023 
Page 10 
 
 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
 
 
 
Mark Raftrey, Certified Law Student 
Kiran Chawla, Certified Law Student 
Stephanie L. Safdi, Supervising Attorney 
Environmental Law Clinic 
Mills Legal Clinic at Stanford Law School 
559 Nathan Abbott Way 
Stanford, California 94305 
(650) 723-0325 
mraftrey@stanford.edu 
kiranpc@stanford.edu 
ssafdi@stanford.edu 
 
Attorneys for Shingle Springs Band of Miwok Indians, Winnemem Wintu Tribe, and Save 
California Salmon.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0278 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Department of Environmentar Quality 
To protect, conserve and enhance the quality of Wyoming's 
environment for the benefit of current and future generations. 
WYOMING 
Mark Gordon, Governor 
Todd Parfitt, Director 
March 2, 2023 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Submitted online via https://www.regulations.gov 
Re: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
To Whom It May Concern, 
Pursuant to both the Federal Clean Water Act (CWA) and Wyoming Statutes, the Wyoming Department 
of Environmental Quality (WDEQ) is responsible for overseeing development and implementation of 
Wyoming's surface water quality standards. As such, WDEQ takes considerable interest in the 
Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) proposed revisions to the CWA water quality standards 
regulation at 40 CFR Part 131 to prescribe how water quality standards must protect aquatic and 
aquatic-dependent resources reserved to tribes through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other 
sources of Federal law. EPA's insufficient engagement with states and tribes has resulted in proposed 
regulations that fail to identify an implementable approach to ensure water quality standards protect 
applicable tribal reserved rights. In addition, the complexities and uncertainties associated with 
identifying and protecting applicable tribal reserved rights will easily overwhelm the already 
complicated and resource-intensive water quality standards revision process. This letter outlines the 
questions about legal authorities, the untenable proposed process for tribal consultation and EPA 
review, and the regulatory ambiguities associated with the proposed revisions that support these 
conclusions. 
The proposed revisions impose significant, unfunded, and largely undefined requirements on WDEQ, 
tribes, and EPA. WDEQ would be required to determine whether there are explicit or implicit tribal 
reserved rights associated with state waters, and if so, to establish water quality standards that would 
protect tribal reserved rights "unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-
dependent resource" and the health of the right holders "to at least the same risk level as provided to 
the general population of the state." WDEQ would also be required to submit to EPA information on the 
"scope, nature, and current and past use of reserved rights, as informed by the right holders." After 
consultation with tribes, EPA would use this information to determine whether surface water quality 
standards submitted by WDEQ sufficiently protect tribal reserved rights. If EPA determined that 
Wyoming's water quality standards failed to sufficiently protect tribal reserved rights, EPA would be 
required to disapprove and promulgate water quality standards for Wyoming. 
200 West 17th Street, Cheyenne, WY 82002 · http://deq.wyoming.gov · Fax (307)635-1784 
ADMIN/OUTREACH 
ABANDONED MINES 
AIR QUALITY 
INDUSTRIAL SITING 
LAND QUALITY 
SOLID & HAZ. WASTE 
WATER QUALITY 
(307) 777-7937 
(307) 777-6145 
(307) 777-7391 
(307) 777-7369 
(307) 777-7756 
(307) 777-7752 
(307) 777-7781 

Among WDEQ's primary concerns with the revisions is the fact that many of the potentially applicable 
tribal reserved rights have not yet been identified, quantified, defined, agreed to by states, tribes, and 
the Federal government, or otherwise fully determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. The CWA 
state surface water quality standards revision process cannot be used as a means to identify, quantify, 
define, negotiate, or litigate tribal reserved rights. Neither WDEQ nor EPA have authority to define the 
nature and extent of tribal reserved rights. In addition, the ability of right holders to exercise their rights 
are dependent on a multitude of factors that extend well beyond surface water quality protections. Both 
the reserved rights and these factors must be identified, defined, and negotiated or otherwise fully 
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction on a waterbody-specific basis prior to the development 
of surface water quality protections for such rights. lfthis critical step is absent, incorporating tribal 
reserved rights into state water quality standards will inevitably entangle the already complex standards 
revision process in arenas far outside its scope. Furthermore, the proposed requirements are much too 
ambiguous; the process for standards development, tribal consultation, and EPA review are 
problematic; and established methodologies to implement the revisions are lacking. 
Engagement with state coregulators, elected state and local leaders, and other stakeholders is critical to 
the development of implementable regulations. However, such engagement appears to have been 
minimal, and engagement with the WDEQ was almost non-existent despite our repeated feedback to 
EPA that it was imperative they engage with state coregulators. 
Given the lack of engagement with states, concerns about legal authorities, and the inability to clearly 
define regulatory requirements, the proposed revisions are premature at best. WDEQ recommends that 
EPA withdraw the proposed rule to address these concerns and conduct meaningful engagement with 
states, tribes, and other stakeholders. WDEQ further recommends that EPA consider whether tribal 
reserved rights are suitable for inclusion in the federal regulations, or whether addressing tribal 
reserved rights on a case-by-case basis through collaboration between tribes, states, and the Federal 
government would be a more productive course of action. Our detailed comments are provided below. 
1. The CWA Does Not Include the Requirement That Water Quality Standards Broadly Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights. Section 303(c) of the CWA identifies that whenever states revise or adopt water 
quality standards, "such standards shall be such as to protect the public health or welfare, enhance the 
quality of water and serve the purposes of this chapter. Such standards shall be established taking into 
consideration their use and value for public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational 
purposes, and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and also taking into consideration their use 
and value for navigation." In addition, 40 CFR 131.12(a), requires "existing instream water uses and the 
level of water quality necessary to protect the existing uses" to "be maintained and protected." As such, 
states are already required to establish water quality standards that protect currently exercised tribal 
reserved rights. Likewise, 40 CFR § 131.21 already confers EPA authority to ensure that water quality 
standards meet the requirements of the CWA and regulations. Congress did not include within these 
requirements, or within the goals and objectives of the CWA, a specific directive that water quality 
standards broadly protect tribal reserved rights, including rights that may not currently be exercised and 
rights that may not be explicitly related to water quality. The lack of explicit authority in the CWA and 
the often undefined nature of tribal reserved rights will likely make Wyoming state water quality 
standards, developed to comply with the proposed revisions, vulnerable to legal challenges. 
2. Determining Tribal Reserved Rights Exceeds WDEQ's Authority. The proposed revisions would 
require the WDEQ to work with tribes to identify tribal reserved rights associated with "aquatic or 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
2 

aquatic dependent resources" held through "treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of 
Federal law" as part of the CWA surface water quality standards revision process. 
As acknowledged by EPA, tribal reserved rights are complicated and often require considerable 
deliberation, negotiation, or litigation. Rights may have been included in a treaty, treaties may not have 
been ratified, and rights may have been modified or not discussed in subsequent treaties. Rights may 
have been granted or limited in an Executive Order. Rights may have been granted or expressly 
abrogated by Congress. Reserved rights may be constrained by factors that both can and cannot be 
remedied. Rights may be implicit, vague, and ambiguous. Tribes may wish to exercise their reserved 
rights or not to exercise their reserved rights. Wyoming, like much of the United States, was historically 
home to a number of tribes that were party to treaties with the United States government. And while 
some of these treaties may reserve rights implicitly or otherwise, the nature and extent of many of 
these rights is currently unknown. 
The CWA surface water quality standards revision process is not an appropriate means to determine the 
nature and extent ofthese rights. The Wyoming Environmental Quality Act (EQA) charges WDEQ with 
preserving and exercising the primary responsibilities and rights of the state of Wyoming. Specific to 
water quality standards, the EQA authorizes WDEQ to develop standards to protect waters of the state. 
The EQA does not authorize WDEQ to determine the nature and extent of reserved rights, nor does it 
authorize WDEQ to relinquish responsibility for establishing water quality standards to EPA. Therefore, 
because tribal reserved rights associated with state waters in Wyoming have not been clearly defined 
and identified, the revisions attempt to force WDEQ into a situation where it has no authority to comply 
with the proposed revisions. 
3. Determining Tribal Reserved Rights Exceeds EPA's Authority. Under the proposed revisions, EPA 
would determine whether states have sufficiently identified and protected applicable tribal reserved 
rights after tribal consultation and based on information submitted by states on the "scope, nature, and 
current and past use of reserved rights, as informed by the right holders." If a state failed to comply, EPA 
would be required to promulgate water quality standards that protect applicable tribal reserved rights. 
Therefore, EPA would need to determine the potentially applicable tribal reserved rights when either 
acting on water quality standards submitted to EPA or when promulgating water quality standards. 
Although Section 511(a)(3) of the CWA outlines that the CWA should "not be construed as ... affecting or 
impairing the provisions of any treaty of the United States," the CWA does not authorize EPA to 
determine the nature and extent of tribal reserved rights; arbitrate, negotiate, or litigate reserved rights; 
or determine how a tribe may or may not exercise a reserved right. Determination of tribal reserved 
rights is governed directly by tribal-state negotiations, specific lines of authority found in U.S. Supreme 
Court case law, state-specific water adjudications, and other specifically binding sources of legal 
authority, not indirectly through unilateral agency rulemaking. As such, EPA should not assert such 
authorities in future discussions regarding tribal reserved rights. 
4. The Proposed Revisions Will Burden Wyoming's Surface Water Quality Standards Revision Process 
and Create Legal Vulnerabilities. If finalized, the proposed regulations would immediately require 
Wyoming to identify potentially applicable tribal reserved rights and establish water quality standards 
necessary to protect reserved rights. If Wyoming failed to do so, EPA would be required to promulgate 
such standards. If such protections were not included in Wyoming's water quality standards, both 
Wyoming and EPA would be out of compliance with the regulations and vulnerable to legal challenges. 
However, to sufficiently protect reserved rights, Wyoming (or EPA) may need to review and potentially 
update Wyoming's water quality criteria for aquatic life, wildlife, and consumption of aquatic life. 
Wyoming may also need to develop new or site-specific water quality criteria to protect reserved rights. 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
3 

This process is extremely complex, resource-intensive, and likely must be carefully negotiated, or 
litigated, between states, tribes, and the Federal government. The surface water quality standards 
revision process is already complicated, resource-intensive, and subject to delays. EPA already often fails 
to meet statutory deadlines, even without the complexity of addressing tribal reserved rights. 
5. Formal Consultation Must Occur Before States Initiate a Triennial Review, Water Quality Standards 
Developed Once Applicable Tribal Reserved Rights Have Been Agreed Upon. The proposed revisions 
require states to submit information to EPA "on the scope, nature, and current and past use of the tribal 
reserved rights, as informed by the right holders." In reviewing state water quality standards, EPA would 
be required to "initiate tribal consultation with the right holders ... in determining whether State water 
quality standards protect applicable reserved rights." The proposed process does not require EPA to 
formally consult with the tribes or provide feedback to Wyoming on reserved rights and the level of 
water quality necessary to support the reserved rights until after our water quality standards revision 
process has been completed. Although WDEQ could reach out to tribes early in the water quality 
standards revision process, some tribes prefer to only engage with the Federal government and may not 
engage directly with WDEQ. Therefore, by the time of formal consultation, WDEQ would have already 
invested significant resources to develop, revise, and adopt water quality standards. Partner agencies 
and stakeholders would have also invested significant resources into the process-the standards would 
have been through scoping and multiple public notices. The standards would have been reviewed by 
legal counsel and our Water and Water Advisory Board, adopted by the Environmental Quality Council, 
and approved by the governor. As such, the proposed process does not provide critical information early 
enough in the rule revision process, nor does it sufficiently recognize the resources Wyoming expends in 
revising water quality standards or the resources that Wyoming would need to expend if water quality 
standards are disapproved. WDEQ's previous efforts to engage EPA early in the rule revision have not 
prevented disapprovals, as EPA has not always been forthcoming about which revisions they view as 
problematic. 
Not only is the proposed process inefficient, the process is also unlikely to result in EPA and states being 
able to meet regulatory timeframes. Section 303(c) of the CWA requires states to review their water 
quality standards at least every three years and for EPA to review and approve submissions within 60 
days or disapprove submissions within 90 days. Federal guidance1 on tribal consultation directs federal 
agencies to provide tribes with 30 days written notice and a 30-day comment period, after which EPA 
must provide responses to the comments received. Therefore, as proposed, EPA would not have 
sufficient time to conduct the tribal consultation and approve state water quality standards submissions. 
Moreover, because tribal reserved rights and the levels of water quality sufficient to protect the rights 
are so complex, delays with the approval process appear inevitable. This makes states and EPA 
vulnerable to legal challenges. 
Further, 40 CFR § 131.3(1) defines "Indian Tribe or Tribe" as "any Indian Tribe, band, group, or 
community recognized by the Secretary of the Interior and exercising governmental authority over a 
Federal Indian reservation." Some tribes have clearly defined governance structures that can serve in an 
official capacity during the water quality standards revision process, but others do not. In circumstances 
where a tribe does not have a defined governance structure, a formal consultation process may not be 
possible. 
1 TTR BEST PRACTICES FLOWCHART {bia.gov) 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
4 

6. Insufficient Local and State Consultation Process, as Required in Executive Order 131322• In the 
federal register notice, EPA concludes that Executive Order 13132 does not apply to this action. 
Executive Order 13132 outlines that the Agency cannot promulgate rules with federalism 
implications,3 including those that pre-empt state and local laws, unless the agency provides all 
affected State and local officials notice and an opportunity for appropriate participation in the 
proceedings. As part of evaluating whether surface water quality standards sufficiently protect 
tribal reserved rights, the proposed revisions grant EPA the authority to determine the scope, 
nature, and extent of tribal reserved rights. The ability of a tribal member to exercise their reserved 
rights associated with aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources undoubtedly requires 
consideration of state and local laws, particularly as they relate to access, allocation of water, and 
fish and wildlife conservation and management. As such, the proposed revisions have the potential 
to conflict with state and local laws and authorities. 
EPA described in the preamble that they provided a conceptual overview of the draft regulations for the 
Association of Clean Water Administrators (ACWA) Monitoring, Standards and Assessment 
Subcommittee and held three additional one-on-one meetings with individual states upon request. EPA 
did not describe any additional consultation with elected state and local officials, nor is WDEQ aware of 
any efforts made by EPA to engage beyond water quality management agencies. Due to the potential 
implications of the proposed revisions to local and state laws, EPA is required under Executive Order 
13132 to consult with state and local officials as part of the regulation revision process. 
7. Insufficient State Consultation Process in Developing the Proposed Revisions. The preamble states 
that the core of the water quality standards regulation was established in 1983 and that EPA has revised 
the regulations only three times since 1983. The preamble further describes that the EPA's state 
consultation process consisted of providing a conceptual overview of the draft regulations for the 
ACWA's Monitoring, Standards and Assessment Subcommittee and holding three additional one-on-one 
meetings with individual states upon request. WDEQ requested additional outreach and engagement on 
the proposed revisions on multiple occasions; however, these requests were not honored by EPA. 
Given that states have the primary responsibility for developing surface water quality standards, 
WDEQ/WQD is alarmed by EPA's lack of engagement with states during development ofthe proposed 
revisions. The fact that the proposed revisions impose new, significant, and far-reaching requirements 
on states that may conflict with other state laws and authorities emphasizes that engagement with 
states is critical. ACWA and the Environmental Council of States are important national organizations 
that represent states. However, these organization do not represent all states, and engagement with 
these organizations should be in addition to, not instead of, engagement with individual states. 
In addition, EPA never addressed questions that states posed through ACWA. For example, EPA relayed 
during one of these discussions that hundreds of reserved rights exist, but EPA never provided individual 
states with information about where the rights may be applicable so that states could have this 
invaluable context when reviewing the proposed revisions. 
Since cooperative federalism is essential to successful development and implementation of water 
quality standards under the CWA, states must be more thoroughly integrated into the regulation 
2 Executive Order 13132, Federalism: https://www.govlnfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1999-08-10/pdf/99-20729.pdf 
3 Federalism implications are defined as having substantial direct effects on states or local governments (individually or 
collectively), on the relationship between the national government and the states, or on the distribution of power and 
responsibilities among the various levels of government. 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
5 

development and revision process. EPA should have provided states and tribes with early engagement 
opportunities in order to provide meaningful feedback to inform the regulation revision process. WDEQ 
recommends EPA initiate a meaningful collaborative cooperative federalism and nation-to-nation 
consultation process with states and tribes collectively. 
8. The Proposed Revisions Lack Clarity Regarding Aquatic and Aquatic-Dependent Resources. The 
proposed revisions require states to protect tribal reserved rights "to the extent supported by available 
data and information," associated with "aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources that are either 
reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly." The proposed revisions do not further define 
these terms, nor do they limit the proposed revisions to those reserved rights directly dependent on 
surface water quality. The proposed revisions do not consider the existing body of directly applicable 
case law specifically addressing treaty rights (e.g., hunting, fishing, gathering). Since many tribal 
reserved rights may be broad and these broad rights may depend to some extent on surface water 
quality, the proposed revisions have the potential to greatly expand the factors that must be considered 
during development of surface water quality protections. As a result, WDEQ would need to expend 
considerable resources determining and negotiating whether a particular reserved right would require 
water quality protections. WDEQ would then need to expend considerable resources determining and 
negotiating the levels of water quality necessary to protect the reserved right. Therefore, despite the 
limitation that the protections be based on "available data and information," the proposed regulations 
do not provide sufficient clarity to avoid protracted negotiations and legal liabilities regarding which 
reserved rights require protections under the proposed rule. 
9. The Proposed Revisions Lacks Clarity Regarding Tribal Reserved Rights "Unsuppressed by Water 
Quality and Availability." The proposed revisions require water quality standards to "the extent 
supported by available data and information" to protect "the exercise of tribal reserved rights 
unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource." However, 
the proposed revisions do not further define these considerations. Determining whether a reserved 
right is suppressed via water quality versus some other direct or indirect factor is complex and resource 
intensive, particularly on the scale that may be necessary to protect reserved rights. For example, fishing 
rights are affected by population management, which may be limited due to surface water quality as 
well as habitat degradation, invasive species, disease, and a number of other factors. And although EPA 
has offered resources to assist states, "available data and information" is subject to interpretation and 
EPA's resources to assist states are limited. Therefore, the proposed regulations do not provide 
sufficient clarity to avoid protracted negotiations and legal liabilities regarding the level of water quality 
necessary to protect potentially applicable tribal reserved rights. 
10. Neither EPA nor States Have Water Quality Criteria or Methodologies to Derive Water Quality 
Criteria to Protect the Potentially Applicable Tribal Reserved Rights. Development of water quality 
standards to protect tribal reserved rights may require the establishment of designated uses and water 
quality criteria that have not been contemplated under either Wyoming's surface water quality 
standards or EPA's nationally recommended water quality criteria. The potential breadth of tribal 
reserved rights contemplated under the proposed revisions may require derivation of water quality 
criteria for which there are currently no agreed-upon methodologies. The potentially applicable 
reserved rights must be identified and methodologies must be developed, agreed upon, and finalized 
prior to imposing requirements to protect such uses. 
11. The Proposed Revisions Do Not Provide Sufficient Flexibility to Not Include Tribal Reserved Rights 
or for Tribes to Decline Consultation When Appropriate. The proposed revisions require the 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
6 

identification and protection of tribal reserved rights, as informed by the right holders, and require EPA 
to consult with tribes. The proposed revisions do not explicitly provide a means for tribes to decline 
protections associated with a reserved right or for a tribe to decline consultation. There are likely a 
number of factors that will influence tribes' interest in protecting reserved rights and consulting with 
EPA. The proposed revisions should be revised accordingly so that states do not face legal challenges 
when reserved rights are not included in surface water quality standards. 
12. The Proposed Revisions Lack Clarity Regarding Quantities of Water. Although 40 CFR § 131.4 
describes "Consistent with section 101(g) and 518(a) of the CWA, water quality standards shall not be 
construed to supersede or abrogate rights to quantities of water," the federal register notice states that 
"Tribal reserved rights as defined in this proposed rule making generally do not address the 
quantification of Winters rights" that reserve sufficient water to accomplish the purposes of a 
reservation4• WDEQ is concerned with EPA's unwillingness to definitively say that the proposed revisions 
will not interfere with the allocation of Winters rights, despite (1) the fact that most of the reserved 
rights contemplated under the proposed revisions are likely to be associated with off-reservation waters 
and (2) both the CWA and the federal regulations include explicit statements that water quality 
standards are not to supersede or abrogate rights to quantities of water. Since the topic of water rights 
extends well beyond WDEQ's, EPA's, and CWA authorities, discussions regarding water quality 
protections associated with tribal reserved rights must explicitly exclude any determination, 
quantification, or definition of federal reserved water rights. 
13. Water Quality Standards Protective of Tribal Reserved Rights Must Recognize Limitations. Since 
many tribal reserved rights are broad (e.g., hunting, fishing, gathering) and therefore dependent on a 
number of factors outside the scope of water quality standards, there are likely a number of instances 
where tribal reserved rights are no longer supported or attainable. Efforts by states to develop water 
quality standards to protect tribal reserved rights must recognize these limitations without requiring 
states to conduct use attainability analyses, discharger-specific variances, or other in-depth and 
resource-intensive evaluations. Without this allowance, the extensive nature of reserved rights and the 
multitude of factors that influence reserved rights place an unreasonable burden on states. 
WDEQ appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the proposed revisions. Given WDEQ's 
extensive concerns with the proposed regulations, WDEQ recommends EPA withdraw the proposed rule 
and conduct meaningful engagement with states and tribes. To this end, WDEQ is ready to engage 
further with EPA and tribes on this important issue. Please contact Lindsay Patterson, Surface Water 
Quality Standards Supervisor, at 307-777-7079 or Lindsay.Patterson@wyo.gov, should you have any 
questions regarding these comments. 
Sincerely, 
Todd Parfitt, Director 
4 Footnote 6 of the proposed describes that "Under Winters v. United States and its progency, the establishment of 
a Federal reservation (Indian or otherwise) implicitly reserves sufficient water to accomplish the purposes of the 
reservation 207 U.S. 564, 576 (1908); Cappaert v. United States, 426 U.S. 128, 139 (1976); Arizona v. California, 373 
U.S. 546, 597-602 (1963). 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
7 

cc: 
Jennifer Zygmunt, Water Quality Division Administrator 
David Waterstreet, Watershed Protection Section Manager 
Chris Brown, Attorney General's Office 
Kit Wendtland, Office of the Governor 
Nolan Rap, Office of the Governor 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
8

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0307 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
1101 K Street, N.W., Suite 700 • Washington, D.C. 20005 • (202) 463-2700 • afandpa.org 
 
 
+ 
 
 
  
 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
Jennifer Brundage 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Water 
Standards and Health Protection Division 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460. 
Re: AF&PA Comments on EPA’s Proposed Rule, “Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights” (Docket No. EPA-
HQ-OW-2021-0791) 87 Federal Register 74361 (December 5, 2022) (the 
“Proposed Rule”) 
 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
 
The American Forest & Paper Association (AF&PA) appreciates the opportunity to 
provide comments to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on the above-
captioned Proposed Rule, “Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights.” AF&PA is mindful and respectful of Tribal sovereignty and of the 
needs and concerns of Tribes and their members for clean water. Those needs and 
concerns must be protected in ways consistent with applicable laws, including the Clean 
Water Act. Any new requirements imposed in this area also must be based on sound 
science and must be implementable.  
 
AF&PA has worked with federal regulators and the regulated community over many 
years to promote development of balanced and attainable water quality standards that 
enhance environmental and human health protections. Our goal is sustainable 
regulation that will stand the test of time. Sustainable regulation must satisfy legal 
requirements and meet economic needs, health and environmental concerns, and social 
expectations. Unfortunately, the Proposed Rule does not meet this goal. In addition to 
filing these separate comments, AF&PA also joins and supports the comments filed by 
the Federal Water Quality Coalition and comments filed by a coalition of trade 
associations.  
 
Executive Summary 
In light of the serious legal and policy problems discussed below, we respectfully 
recommend the Proposed Rule be withdrawn. We believe that EPA would be better 

March 6, 2023 
Page 2 
 
served to engage in a dialogue with Tribes, States, the regulated community and other 
stakeholders on approaches to advance legally sound and attainable water quality 
standards that enhance environmental and human health protections and that reflect 
the best available science. Our concerns include the following:  
 
• The Proposed Rule would exceed EPA’s statutory authority and be invalidated under 
the major questions doctrine (pp. 3-8);  
• EPA has not, but must, fully consider costs, including expected costs on all regulated 
entities, as well as expected costs on non-point sources (pp. 8-11); 
• The specific requirements of the Proposed Rule are inconsistent with the Clean 
Water Act and the existing regulations, and would result in criteria that do not 
reflect the best available science (pp. 11-13):  
o Water quality standards should be objective and scientifically defensible (p.  
11);  
o The proposed risk assessment approach of treating high consuming tribal 
members as the target population is inconsistent with current risk assessment 
science, would result in unachievable criteria, and other reasonable 
approaches should be used, particularly probabilistic risk assessment (pp. 11-
13);  
o EPA should rely on the best available science to make the criteria scientifically 
defensible and implementable (p. 13);  
• The Proposed Rule imposes significant and complex implementation challenges that 
need to be addressed before States are required to adhere to its requirements (pp. 
13-14); and  
• The Proposed Rule would undermine the cooperative federalism at the heart of the 
Clean Water Act (p. 14). 
 
Introduction 
 
AF&PA serves to advance U.S. paper and wood products manufacturers through fact-
based public policy and marketplace advocacy. The forest products industry is circular 
by nature. AF&PA member companies make essential products from renewable and 
recycled resources, generate renewable bioenergy and are committed to continuous 
improvement through the industry’s sustainability initiative — Better Practices, Better 
Planet 2030. The forest products industry accounts for approximately 5% of the total 
U.S. manufacturing GDP, manufactures about $350 billion in products annually and 
employs about 925,000 people. The industry meets a payroll of about $65 billion 
annually and is among the top 10 manufacturing sector employers in 43 states.  
 

March 6, 2023 
Page 3 
 
AF&PA’s sustainability initiative — Better Practices, Better Planet 2030: Sustainable 
Products for a Sustainable Future — comprises one of the most extensive quantifiable 
sets of sustainability goals for a U.S. manufacturing industry and is the latest example of 
our members’ proactive commitment to the long-term success of our industry, our 
communities and our environment. We have long been responsible stewards of our 
planet’s resources.  
 
AF&PA members met or surpassed many of the goals outlined in our previous 
sustainability initiative, Better Practices, Better Planet 2020. Since 2005, AF&PA 
members have reduced water use by more than 8%. Our 2030 water goal, to Advance 
Sustainable Water Management through a Watershed Approach Throughout Our 
Manufacturing Operations, will expand and further our efforts. 
 
Our members have a direct interest in this rulemaking because if this rule is finalized as 
proposed, water permits for our members’ mills in States with tribal reserved rights 
could include new limits that are unachievable, even with cost-prohibitive control 
technology, as a result of the rule.1  
 
I. 
The Proposed Rule Would Exceed EPA’s Statutory Authority and Be Invalidated 
Under the Major Questions Doctrine.  
 
The Proposed Rule exceeds the statutory authority delegated by Congress to EPA. 
“Administrative agencies are creatures of statute,” and “[t]hey accordingly possess only 
the authority that Congress has provided.”2 The U.S. Supreme Court has made clear that 
“we ‘typically greet’ assertions of ‘extravagant statutory power over the national 
economy’ with ‘skepticism.’”3 The major questions doctrine applies where, as here, 
“agencies assert[] highly consequential power beyond what Congress could reasonably 
be understood to have granted.”4 Congress does not lightly confer on an agency the 
authority to regulate “a significant portion of the American economy”5 or to require 
“billions of dollars in spending”6 by the private sector, municipalities, and other 
 
1 See U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Economic Analysis for Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (Proposed Rule), at 5, 12 (2022) (noting that that tribes have asserted 
reserved rights in several states, including Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Idaho, and the rule may lead to 
stringent water quality standards in those states). 
2 Nat’l Federation of Indep. Bus. v. OSHA, 142 S. Ct. 661, 665 (2022). 
3 West Virginia v. EPA, 142 S. Ct. 2587, 2609 (2022) (quoting Utility Air Regulatory Group v. EPA, 573 U.S. 302, 324 
(2014)).  
4 West Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2609 (and cases cited therein).  
5 West Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2608 (quoting Util. Air Regulatory Grp., 573 U.S. at 324).  
6 King v Burwell, 576 U.S. 473, 485 (2015); West Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2621 (Gorsuch, J., concurring).  

March 6, 2023 
Page 4 
 
governmental authorities. This is one of the “extraordinary cases … in which the ‘history 
and breadth of the authority that [the agency] has asserted,’ and the ‘economic and 
political significance’ of that assertion, provide a ‘reason to hesitate before concluding 
that Congress’ mean to confer such authority.”7 EPA has not shown any clear statutory 
authority for the Agency’s assertion of this new-found regulatory authority, and it is of 
great political and economic significance.8  
 
The history of EPA’s assertion of this new-found regulatory authority is instructive.9 The 
treaties at issue here were entered into over a century ago. The Clean Water Act was 
enacted over 50 years ago. At no point since the CWA was enacted in 1972 has Congress 
clearly spoken to the issue of how Tribal treaties interact with the CWA. EPA has not 
demonstrated that any statutory provision has clearly delegated it the regulatory 
authority it claims in the Proposed Rule, including but not limited to the power to 
mandate that States adopt certain designated uses, to interpret treaties or other 
agreements between sovereign governments, or to transform tribal reserved rights into 
requirements for water quality and use and land use planning, areas of traditional State 
authority.  
 
EPA cites CWA section 501 as authority for the Proposed Rule.10 However, this garden-
variety, general rulemaking authority for the Administrator “to prescribe such 
regulations as are necessary to carry out his functions” under the CWA11 is not a clear 
Congressional authorization to override the structure and text of the Act that require, 
for example, the consideration of economic factors and designated uses, as well as the 
preservation of the sovereign authority of States and Tribes designated as States.12 Nor 
does section 501 authorize EPA to expand its CWA regulatory power through authorities 
 
7 West Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2608 (quoting FDA v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., 529 U.S. 120, 159-160 
(1989)) (emphasis added).  
8 See Alabama Ass’n of Realtors v. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs., 141 S. Ct. 2485, 2489 (2021); Nat’l Fed’n of 
Indep. Bus. v. Occupational Safety & Health Admin., 142 S. Ct. 661, 665 (2022); West Virginia v. EPA, 142 S. Ct. 
2587, 2608, 2610-14 (2022); Util. Air Regulatory Grp. v. EPA, 573 U.S. 302 (2014); Georgia v. President of the United 
States, 46 F.4th 1283, 1295-96 (11th Cir. 2022); Louisiana v. Biden, 55 F.4th 1017 (5th Cir. 2022). 
9 See West Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2608 (quoting FDA v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., 529 U.S. at 159-160).  
10 See Proposed Rule, 87 Fed. Reg. at 74363. 
11 33 U.S.C. § 1361(a).  
12 See discussion infra; see also CWA section 510, 33 U.S.C. § 1370, “State authority”: “Except as expressly provided 
in this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall (1) preclude or deny the right of any State or political subdivision 
thereof or interstate agency to adopt or enforce (A) any standard or limitation respecting discharges of pollutants, 
or (B) any requirement respecting control or abatement of pollution … or (2) be construed as impairing or in any 
manner affecting any right or jurisdiction of the States with respect to the waters (including boundary waters) of 
such States.” (emphasis added).    

March 6, 2023 
Page 5 
 
it interprets beyond the CWA. In the preamble to the Proposed Rule, EPA quotes one 
paragraph of the CWA, subsection 511(a)(3), related to all treaties, not just tribal 
treaties. Section 511(a)(3) of the CWA states that “[t]his Act shall not be construed as … 
affecting or impairing the provisions of any treaty of the United States.”13 This provision 
is a limitation on EPA’s regulatory power; it clarifies that the U.S. government should not 
affect or impair treaty provisions in construing the CWA. Yet, EPA interprets section 
511(a) as authorization to vastly expand its CWA regulatory authority where the CWA 
arguably overlaps with “treaty reserved rights.”14 It was well over 40 years after the 
enactment of the CWA that EPA first expressed the view, expanded upon in the 
Proposed Rule, that tribal treaties could override the CWA.15 Indeed, EPA’s consistent 
position for over 40 years since enactment of the CWA has been that the treaties do not 
modify EPA’s or States’ obligations under the CWA.16  
 
In the Proposed Rule, EPA is asserting that the CWA authorizes it to interpret treaties 
with Indian tribes, and then to use its interpretations as grounds for concluding that it is 
necessary for EPA to adopt far more stringent water quality criteria than the CWA would 
otherwise require. As in the recently finalized rule on Human Health Water Quality 
Criteria for Washington State (WA HHWQC),17 EPA is asserting that its interpretations of 
treaty rights allow it to bootstrap to extraordinarily stringent HHWQC – so stringent that 
they are unachievable for the regulated community. The potential ramification is that 
EPA could interpret federal treaties to require state water quality standards that could 
severely restrict or effectively prohibit large swaths of economic activity in a state. For 
example, in interpreting a tribal treaty right to take fish, could EPA mandate WQC to 
ensure pre-settlement conditions? The CWA should not, and cannot, properly be 
interpreted to give EPA such sweeping authority, particularly when there is no clear 
 
13 33 U.S.C. § 1371(a).  
14 See 87 Fed. Reg. at 74364-65.  
15 See 87 Fed. Reg. at 74364-66 (describing EPA’s views, first developed around 2015 before they were retracted 
during the last administration and then most recently reasserted, on tribal reserved rights in WQS actions).  
16 See e.g., EPA’s Consolidated Brief in Sierra Club v. McLerran, Case No. 2:11-cv-01759-BJR Docket No. 91 at 40-43 
(January 29, 2014) (noting that without an unambiguous provision by Congress that clearly outlines a federal trust 
responsibility, the federal trust responsibility is a limited one only and it does not impose a duty on the federal 
government to take action beyond complying with generally applicable statutes and regulations). See also Sierra 
Club v. McLerran, 45 ELR 20052, Case No. 2:11-cv-01759-BJR Docket No. 120 at 23 (March 16, 2015) (holding that 
EPA had discharged its trust duty by complying with the CWA).   
17 EPA, Final Rule, “Restoring Protective Human Health Criteria in Washington,” 87 Fed. Reg. 69138 (Nov. 18, 2022) 
(WA HHWQC rule).  

March 6, 2023 
Page 6 
 
statutory authority to that effect, as well as no indication of limiting principles from 
Congress as to how that authority would be applied.18   
 
Not only does EPA fail to demonstrate clear Congressional authorization for its newly 
discovered regulatory authority under a long-extant statute, but also, that authority is 
well outside the Agency’s other rulemaking responsibilities and expertise.19 It is the 
Department of Interior, not EPA, that has been delegated authority by Congress to 
administer the laws governing Indian affairs.20  
 
Moreover, “the breadth of the authority that [the agency] has asserted” is 
extraordinary.21 EPA’s new-found regulatory authority includes, but is not limited to, the 
power to reinterpret treaty rights or to add new authorities or conditions to existing 
treaties to bootstrap to unachievable water quality standards. The clearest example of 
this assertion of vast regulatory power is EPA’s recently-finalized WA HHWQC rule,22 
which overrode a very stringent yet achievable rule originally supported by the State, 
and which evidently is unachievable for the entire regulated community, including 
industrial and municipal facilities.23   
 
The Proposed Rule is of vast economic significance because, if finalized as proposed, the 
rule could lead to unachievable water quality standards and water permit limits – 
because the standards would be more stringent than current detection limits or natural 
background levels, or because no cost-feasible technologies are available for effective 
treatment. While EPA has not estimated costs that regulated entities will incur as a 
result of the Proposed Rule, EPA has acknowledged that the rule may lead to more 
stringent water quality standards in geographic areas where Tribes hold reserved rights, 
and that would lead to new additional control measures and associated costs for 
regulated entities and nonpoint sources.24  
 
 
18 See AF&PA Comments on EPA’s Proposal, “Restoring Protective Human Health Criteria in Washington” (Docket 
No. EPA-HQ-OW-2015-0174) 87 Federal Register 19046 (April 1, 2022) (May 31, 2022).  
19 See, e.g., West Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2610-14; 2623 (and cases cited therein).   
20 See 43 U.S.C. § 1457 (2021); see also, 25 U.S.C. § 1a (2021).  
21 See West Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2608 (quoting FDA v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., 529 U.S. at 159-160).  
22 See 87 Fed. Reg. 69183 (Nov. 18, 2022). 
23 Indeed, no agency, including the Department of Interior, has the power to unilaterally revise or expand a treaty 
(which is what EPA theoretically could do if it, for example, were to interpret a simple reservation of rights to fish 
in a particular water as a guarantee that water quality will be as existed prior to the treaty in that water and 
surrounding waters). The power to make treaties is reserved to the President, with the approval of two-thirds of 
the Senate, as set out in the Treaty Clause of Article II, Section 2, Clause 2 of the U.S. Constitution.  
24 See e.g., U.S. EPA, Economic Analysis for Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved 
Rights (Proposed Rule) (2022), at p. 12.  

March 6, 2023 
Page 7 
 
As discussed further below, an economic analysis prepared for AF&PA considered the 
potential impact of applying more broadly an extremely stringent approach to water 
quality standards, such as the approach taken in EPA’s WA HHWQC rule. Based on this 
analysis, we believe that if the approach taken in WA HHWQC were applied in several 
other States, as proposed in this rule, the costs could be on the order of $828M to 
$943M per year for the U.S. pulp and paper industry alone, which could be 
unsustainable.  
 
Finally, the Proposed Rule has vast political significance. It would undermine the 
cooperative federalism which is the foundation of the CWA. The regulatory power that 
EPA is claiming includes but is not limited to the power to mandate that States and 
Tribes as States adopt certain designated uses, to interpret treaties or other agreements 
between sovereign governments, or to transform tribal reserved rights into 
requirements for water quality and use and land use planning, areas of traditional State 
authority. Although Congress has not clearly authorized it, the Proposed Rule would 
unlawfully “alter[] the federal-state framework by permitting federal encroachment 
upon a traditional state power.”25 EPA would take over quintessentially political 
decisions that the CWA reserves for the States, such as decisions about the best use of 
State water resources,26 whether the State should try to "restore" water quality to 
protect a level of use of aquatic life and water-dependent resources that perhaps has 
not existed for hundreds of years,27 and what level of modeled risk to human health is 
acceptable for State residents generally and for subpopulations.28  
 
In sum, many factors that trigger the major questions doctrine are presented by the 
Proposed Rule, including: 
• EPA is claiming “to discover in a long-extant statute an unheralded power 
representing a transformative expansion in [its] regulatory authority.”29 Indeed,  
 
25 See Solid Waste Agency of N. Cook Cty. v. U.S. Army Corps. of Engin’rs, 531 U.S. 159, 173 (2001).  
26 See CWA Section 303(c)(2)(A), 33 U.S.C. § 1313 (c)(2)(A).  
27 See CWA Section 101(b), 33 U.S.C. 1251(b) (“It is the policy of Congress to recognize, preserve, and protect the 
primary responsibilities and rights of States to prevent, reduce, and eliminate pollution, to plan the development 
and use (including restoration, preservation, and enhancement) of land and water resources, and to consult with 
the Administrator in the exercise of his authority under this chapter.”).   
28 EPA has long recognized that States and Tribes as States have the right to decide acceptable risk levels. See 81 
Fed. Reg. 85,417, 85,420 (Nov. 28, 2016) (EPA recommends States and Tribes as States use a cancer risk level of 10-
6 or 10-5, provided "the risk to more highly exposed subgroups (sport fishers or subsistence fishers) does not 
exceed the 10-4 level"); NRDC v. EPA, 16 F.3d 1395, 1403 (4th Cir. 1993) (EPA deferred to State decision on 
acceptability of claimed risk to Native American subpopulation); see also id. at 1402, n.10 ("NRDC concedes that 
risk level generally is a state policy choice.").  
29 West Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2610 (citation omitted).  

March 6, 2023 
Page 8 
 
there is a lack of “clear congressional authorization” to “regulate a significant 
portion of the American economy or require billions of dollars in spending,” 
particularly considering “the legislative provisions on which the agency seeks to 
rely with a view to their place in the overall statutory scheme,” the “focus of the 
statute in relation to the problem the agency seeks to address,” and “the 
agency’s past interpretations of the relevant statute”;30 
• EPA’s action “effects a fundamental revision of the statute, changing it from [one 
sort of] scheme of … regulation into an entirely different kind”;31  
• EPA has “no comparative expertise in making [the] policy judgments” contained 
in its rule;32  
• The choice in EPA’s rule involves “major social and economic policy decisions” in 
a highly controversial area33 of “great political significance”;34 and  
• The rule “intrud[es] into an area that is the particular domain of state law.”35 
 
Given its great economic and political significance and lack of clear statutory authority, if 
finalized in this form, the Proposed Rule would trigger the major questions doctrine and 
be invalidated.36 Accordingly, EPA should withdraw the Proposed Rule and consider an 
alternative, more productive means to address the concerns it raises.  
 
II. 
EPA Has Failed to Reasonably Consider the Potential Impacts of the Proposed 
Rule, Including Costs, and Must Perform and Consider a Full Cost-Benefit 
Analysis.  
 
In the economic analysis section of the preamble, EPA states the following: 
 
“Pursuant to Executive Orders 12866 (Regulatory Planning and Review) 
and 13563 (Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review), EPA has 
prepared an economic analysis to inform the public of potential costs and 
benefits of this proposed rule. This analysis is not required by the CWA.”37 
 
 
30 Id., 142 S. Ct. at 2622-23 (Gorsuch, J. concurring) (and cases cited therein; citations omitted).  
31 West Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2612 (citation omitted).  
32 Id. at 2612-13 (citation omitted). 
33 Id. at 2613 (citation omitted). 
34 Id. at 2620-21 (Gorsuch, J., concurring) (citations omitted).  
35 Id., at 2621 (Gorsuch, J., concurring) (and cases cited therein; internal quotations omitted).  
36 See, e.g., West Virginia v. EPA, 142 S. Ct. at 2608; Nat’l Fed’n of Indep. Bus. v. Occupational Safety & Health 
Admin., 142 S. Ct. at 665; Alabama Ass’n of Realtors v. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs., 141 S. Ct. at 2489; Utility Air 
Regulatory Group v. EPA, 573 U.S. 302 (2014); Georgia, 46 F.4th at 1295-96; Louisiana v. Biden, 55 F.4th 1017 (5th 
Cir. 2022).  
37 87 Fed. Reg. 74361, 74373 (Dec. 5, 2022). 

March 6, 2023 
Page 9 
 
(Emphasis added). EPA acknowledges that the rule could lead to additional 
compliance costs for regulated entities to meet permit limits put in place as a 
result of this rule. However, EPA states that, because of uncertainty, it was 
unable to estimate costs to regulated entities and instead focuses on 
administrative costs to State governments. EPA sought comment on its economic 
analysis.38 
 
In a line of cases from State Farm39 to Entergy Corp. v. Riverkeeper40 to Michigan 
v. EPA,41 the Supreme Court has made clear that agencies such as EPA must 
weigh cost and benefits, absent a statutory prohibition to the contrary. In 
Michigan, the Court made clear that statutory language such as “appropriate and 
necessary” is the kind of “capacious” language that requires the consideration of 
all relevant factors, including cost.42 All nine justices agreed that “[c]ost is almost 
always a relevant, and usually, a highly important – factor in regulation. Unless 
Congress provides otherwise, an agency acts unreasonably in establishing a 
standard-setting process that ignore[s] economic considerations.”43 Nothing in 
the relevant language of the CWA relieves EPA from this obligation; in fact, EPA 
has recently asserted, and the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit has 
agreed, that the language of the CWA allows EPA to consider compliance costs 
when approving State water quality standards or variances.44  
 
The Proposed Rule fails to provide meaningful estimates of the costs that would 
result from the rule – and does not attempt to estimate costs on regulated 
entities – and likewise does not reasonably compare the costs with the benefits 
likely to occur nor consider reasonable alternatives. Yet, Section 501(1) of the 
CWA – cited as authority for the Proposed Rule45 – delegates to the EPA 
Administrator the authority to “prescribe such regulations as are necessary to 
carry out his functions” under the Act.46 This capacious phrase, “as are 
necessary,” requires the Administrator to consider all relevant factors, including 
cost. Likewise, Section 304(a) directs the Administrator, in developing water 
 
38 87 Fed. Reg. 74361, 74373 (Dec. 5, 2022). 
39 Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29 (1983).  
40 556 U.S. 208 (2009).  
41 135 S. Ct. 2699 (2015). 
42 See 135 S. Ct. at 2707. 
43 135 S. Ct. at 2716-17 (Kagan, J., dissenting). 
44 Upper Missouri Waterkeeper v. US EPA, 15 F.4th 966, 972-74 (9th Cir. 2021)(“EPA has reasonably 
construed § 1313(c)(2)(A) [CWA section 303(c)(2)(A)] as permitting it to consider compliance costs when 
approving water quality standards and variance requests”).  
45 Proposed Rule, 87 Fed. Reg. at 74363.  
46 33 U.S.C. § 1361(a).  

March 6, 2023 
Page 10 
 
quality criteria, to develop information “on the factors necessary” to restore and 
maintain the relevant waters and wildlife.47 Furthermore, Section 303(c), also 
cited by EPA as authority for the Proposed Rule,48 makes clear that water quality 
standards “shall be established taking into consideration their use and value for 
public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, and 
agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and also taking into consideration 
their use and value for navigation.”49 Thus, EPA has broad discretion to consider 
all relevant factors, including impacts such as costs, and must do so to avoid 
being arbitrary.  
 
An economic analysis prepared for AF&PA considered the potential impact of 
applying more broadly a stringent approach to water quality standards, such as 
the approach taken in the recently finalized WA HHWQC rule. Based on this 
analysis, we have reason to believe that if the approach taken in the WA HHWQC 
rule were applied in other States, as indicated in the Proposed Rule, the costs 
could be on the order of $828M to $943M per year for our industry alone, which 
could be unsustainable. This represents potential capital and operating costs 
associated with tertiary treatment, such as membranes; reverse osmosis; 
granulated activated carbon; or advanced oxidation.  
 
A regulatory approach that could result in unattainable water quality standards could 
create extreme regulatory uncertainty. If the standards are unattainable, the only 
recourse for the regulated facilities would be an exception, such as a variance. However, 
variances are uncertain to be granted, subject to legal challenge, and are time-limited. 
Thus, even if a variance were granted, there is no guarantee that it would endure or be 
renewed into the future.   
 
In addition, EPA acknowledges that the Proposed Rule would impose costs on 
regulated entities and non-point sources. While non-point sources are not 
typically subject to NPDES permitting, States can and do regulate non-point 
sources through water quality standards, as mandated by CWA section 
208(b)(2).50 In short, as EPA requires States to implement the State’s or EPA’s 
interpretation of tribal reserved rights in State water quality standards, that 
would lead to more stringent TMDLs, and States could allocate reductions to non-
point sources. Examples of reductions could come from stormwater management 
 
47 33 U.S.C. § 1314(a).  
48 Proposed Rule, 87 Fed. Reg. at 74364.  
49 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c).  
50 33 U.S.C. § 1288(b)(2).  

March 6, 2023 
Page 11 
 
or other control measures. EPA must fully account for the costs on non-point 
sources in the rule. 
 
III. 
The Specific Requirements of the Proposed Rule Are Inconsistent with the Clean 
Water Act and the Existing Regulations, and Would Result in Criteria that Do 
Not Reflect the Best Available Science.  
 
A. Under the Clean Water Act, Water Quality Standards Must Be Objective and 
Scientifically Defensible.   
 
Water quality standards are based on equations that should be transparent and lead to 
repeatable outcomes and that permit holders can rely on to know what the outcome 
will be, since their limits are based on that outcome.  
 
Requiring States to set criteria based on an unsuppressed fish consumption rate is 
inconsistent with these principles and has no basis in the CWA. States have been 
adopting WQS for many years, and EPA has never required that before. In addition, this 
requirement is inconsistent with CWA’s focus on attainable, designated uses, including 
industrial uses.51    
 
From a technical perspective, EPA has recognized that quantification of suppression can 
be very difficult using traditional survey methods, and depending on how questions are 
asked, the derived estimates may not be accurate.52 Accordingly, fish consumption rates 
should be based on reliable surveys and literature reviews before using the resulting 
values to develop water quality criteria.  
 
The method used by Idaho to develop its fish consumption rate – to use surveys to 
determine representative consumption data that account for both the general 
population and high-consuming subgroups – is preferred, and we recommend EPA 
consider that approach for this rulemaking. 
 
B. The Proposed Risk Approach of Treating High Consuming Tribal Members as the 
Only Target Population is Not Consistent with Current Risk Assessment Science, 
Will Result in Unachievable Criteria, and Other Approaches are Available such 
as Probabilistic Risk Assessment, Which We Recommend.  
 
 
51 See 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251(a), 1313(c) (2020); see also, 40 C.F.R. 131.2 (interpreting the purposes of the Clean Water 
Act to mean, in part, that water quality standards be attainable and take into consideration industrial uses). 
52 EPA Guidance for Conducting Fish Consumption Surveys (2016), at pp. 82, 83.  

March 6, 2023 
Page 12 
 
If EPA wants to develop granular criteria that adequately protect a high consuming 
subpopulation, such as Tribes, the use of Probabilistic Risk Assessment (PRA) is very 
well-suited to this task, and we recommend EPA adopt it here.53 Requiring that water 
quality criteria be calculated based on a single fish consumption rate that does not 
account for both the general population and high-consuming subgroups is not 
consistent with current risk protection science. In addition, targeting risk levels at 10-5 or 
10-6 for a high-consuming subpopulation results in overly stringent risk levels for the 
general population that is also not consistent with modern risk protection science and 
can result in tremendous societal costs.  
 
As an alternative solution, we recommend the use of modern risk assessment 
approaches (e.g., probabilistic risk assessment (PRA)), which allow different risk levels to 
be targeted to different subsets of the population, and final criteria can then be chosen 
such that the risk levels are concurrently met for each subpopulation.54 PRA aligns with 
current EPA risk recommendations, while the departure described in this Proposed Rule 
is not consistent with EPA recommendations and has not been justified from past EPA 
interpretations of what the CWA requires.  
 
Furthermore, according to EPA’s methodology for developing human health water 
quality standards, the 10-4 risk target is considered de minimis and protective of public 
health, and therefore the use of risk targets lower than 10-4 may decrease the numerical 
water quality criteria but does not necessarily increase the associated level of 
protection.55 Eliminating the 10-4 as a potential risk target for subpopulations 
unnecessarily limits the utility of modern risk assessment approaches, such as PRA, 
which has the ability to consider multiple risk targets in various subpopulations, and 
protect all subpopulations concurrently at different levels. 
 
Eliminating consideration of baseline risk (e.g. 10-4) reduces the scientific validity and 
efficiency of risk assessments and increases the propensity of compounded 
conservatism that does not reduce risk to exposed populations and can lead to 
unachievable water quality criteria, where the numeric criteria are more stringent than 
 
53 See, e.g., EPA, Risk Assessment Forum White Paper: Probabilistic Risk Assessment Methods and Case Studies 
(2014), at p. iii (2014) (noting that “risk assessors, risk managers and others, particularly within the scientific and 
research divisions, have recognized that more sophisticated statistical and mathematical approaches could be 
utilized to enhance the quality and accuracy of Agency risk assessments).  
54 See Memorandum from National Council for Air and Stream Improvement (NCASI) to the American Forest & 
Paper Association (AF&PA), Technical Comments on EPA’s Proposed Rule: Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 (Feb 28, 2023) (attached). 
55 See U.S. EPA Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human Health 
(2000).  

March 6, 2023 
Page 13 
 
the natural background or even detection levels, or the resulting criteria cannot be met 
using cost-effective technologies.56   
 
As some States have relied on PRA, EPA has recognized its value as best available 
science.57 Therefore, as EPA considers developing risk levels, the Agency should use PRA 
as a more granular approach that can enable EPA to achieve specific levels of risk for 
specific populations. 
 
C. EPA Should Rely on the Best Available Science To Make The Criteria 
Scientifically Defensible and Implementable.  
 
There are gaps in the science regarding protections for aquatic dependent resources 
and questions regarding the extent to which treaties apply to “resource gathering 
rights.” Because this is an evolving area, and broader than past experience in Maine, 
Washington, and Idaho, EPA should have a dialogue with stakeholders and not include 
this in the final rule. 
 
IV. 
The Proposed Rule Imposes Significant Implementation Challenges That Should 
be Addressed Before States are Required to Adhere to its Requirements.  
 
In the past, EPA has recognized new major approaches to water quality standard 
development should be coordinated with implementation guidance, such as in its 
Mercury Fish Tissue Criteria.58 This Proposed Rule is just as – or more – significant, and 
implementation guidance is needed. EPA should delay implementation until guidance is 
available, notice and comment is provided, and changes are incorporated to reflect 
stakeholder input.  
 
As noted above, if the rule is finalized as proposed, it would lead to unachievable permit 
limits for many industries and municipalities for several widespread pollutants unable to 
be treated to stringent low levels, even with cost-prohibitive control technology. To 
 
56 See Memorandum from National Council for Air and Stream Improvement (NCASI) to the American Forest & 
Paper Association (AF&PA), Technical Comments on EPA’s Proposed Rule: Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 (Feb 28, 2023) (attached). 
57 EPA, Risk Assessment Forum White Paper: Probabilistic Risk Assessment Methods and Case Studies (2014), at p. 
iii (2014) (“Throughout many of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) programs offices and regions, 
various forms of probabilistic methods have been used to answer questions about exposure and risk to humans, 
other organisms and the environment. Risk assessors, risk managers and others, particularly within the scientific 
and research divisions, have recognized that more sophisticated statistical and mathematical approaches could be 
utilized to enhance the quality and accuracy of Agency risk assessments.”).  
58 See 66 Fed. Reg. 1344, 1344-45 (Jan. 8, 2001). See also, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Science 
and Technology, Guidance for Implementing the January 2001 Methylmercury Water Quality Criterion (April 2010). 

March 6, 2023 
Page 14 
address this problem, EPA should develop resources for the States to facilitate the 
variance process so that regulated entities such as pulp and paper mills essential to their 
communities and the country can continue to operate. Without useful, flexible 
implementation tools for States and the regulated community, both industrial and 
municipal dischargers would be severely harmed by the Proposed Rule.  
V.
The Proposed Rule Upsets the Cooperative Federalism that is the Foundation of
the Clean Water Act.
Under the Clean Water Act and the CWA regulations,59 States develop water quality 
standards, and EPA reviews the water quality standards based on several criteria, such 
as whether the State has adopted designated uses consistent with the Clean Water Act, 
and whether the State has adopted criteria to protect the designated water uses based 
on sound scientific criteria. By adding on new regulatory requirements for EPA to review 
and either approve or disapprove State water quality standards – beyond designated 
uses and sound science – based on EPA’s interpretation of federal treaties and without 
regard to States’ decisions about designation and protection of uses for the States’ 
waters – EPA is upsetting the balance of cooperative federalism on which the Clean 
Water Act is based.60  
VI. 
Conclusion
To achieve the goal of sustainable regulation that will stand the test of time, we 
recommend that EPA engage in a dialogue with Tribes, States, the regulated 
community and other stakeholders on approaches to advance attainable water 
quality standards that enhance environmental and human health protections. We 
look forward to working with you on this effort. 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the Proposed Rule. If you have any 
questions, please contact Jesse Levine at (202) 463-2700.  
Best regards, 
Paul Noe 
 Vice President for Public Policy   
59 40 C.F.R. 131.5 (2021).  
60 See 33 U.S.C § 1251 (noting that “it is the policy of the Congress to recognize, preserve, and protect the primary 
responsibilities and rights of States to prevent, reduce, and eliminate pollution … of water resources” (2020).  

March 6, 2023 
Page 15 
 
 
 
Attachment:  NCASI Technical Memo – Technical Comments on EPA’s Proposed Rule: 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0288 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
1 
 
 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
Submitted via www.regulations.gov 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
 
 
Ms. Jennifer Brundage 
Office of Water, Standards, and Health Protection Division (4305T) 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue N.W. 
Washington D.C.  20460 
 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
 
On December 5, 2022, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published 
a proposed rule titled, “Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights.” 87 FR 74361 (Dec 5, 2022).  The proposal is intended to 
modify the Clean Water Act (CWA) water quality standards program, promulgated 
at 40 CFR Part 131, to create additional requirements for states, tribes, and the 
federal government when promulgating water quality standards related to “tribal 
reserved rights”.   
 
These comments are submitted the J.R. Simplot Company (Simplot).  Simplot is a 
privately held, global agribusiness corporation based in Boise, Idaho.  Simplot is 
engaged in a number of businesses including vegetable and potato processing, 
farming, mining of phosphate and silica, fertilizer manufacturing, fertilizer 
distribution, ranching, beef cattle feedlots, beef processing, and other enterprises 
related to agriculture.   
 
As thoroughly discussed in the attached comment document, EPA has proposed 
a rule that is exceeds its statutory authority and is not in accordance with the law.  
Furthermore, the proposal lacks the scientific rigor required by the Clean Water 
Act in regards to the establishment of water quality standards.  EPA’s proposed 
rule, is replete with internal inconsistencies, could unlawfully establish an 
actionable trust obligation on the federal government and on states, and, if finalized 
as proposed, will create new burdens on state agencies, create new conflicts 
between sovereign states and tribal nations, and result in considerable new 
requirements upon the regulated community.   
 
Simplot recommends that EPA not move forward with this rulemaking and instead 
work with the States, tribes and the regulated community in a cooperative rather 
than a “control” manner.  The State of Idaho has done considerable work over the 
past decade looking at key issues in water quality (and fish), determining fish 

 
 
 
2 
consumption rates (including subpopulations) and then used this information to 
update human health water quality criteria.  The elements of this work provide an 
example that can be followed by other CWA delegated authorities. 
 
Please contact me at (208) 780-7365 if you have any questions about these 
comments. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Alan L. Prouty 
Vice President 
Environmental & Regulatory Affairs 
 
Attachment 
 
C: 
National Mining Association 
The Fertilizer Institute 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Proposed Rulemaking on Clean Water Act 
Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
 
 
 
Comments by  
 
J.R. Simplot Company 
Boise, Idaho 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 6, 2023 
 
 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  2 | 30 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
I.  INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................ 4 
II.  OVERVIEW OF COMMENTS ................................................................................... 4 
III. THE PROPOSED RULE IS UNLAWFUL ................................................................. 5 
a.  The proposed rule is expansive, but EPA has interpreted it 
narrowly and has failed to consider major aspects of the 
problems it would be creating ............................................................... 5 
b. The proposal would broadly expand the federal government’s 
reach into state management of waters and other resources ............ 7 
c.  States and TAS tribes establish designated uses, not EPA ..................... 8 
d.  It is unclear if the proposed rule would influence the pending 
Supreme Court decision or vice versa .................................................. 9 
e.  It is unclear if Winters implied rights are included in the rule .................. 9 
IV.  THE PROPOSED RULE UNDERCUTS THE USE OF SCIENCE AND 
RIGOROUS SCIENTIFIC METHODS TO DEVELOP WATER QUALITY 
STANDARDS .................................................................................................... 10 
a. Proposed rule does not use scientific rigor to set water quality 
standards ............................................................................................... 10 
b.  Water quality data provide very limited support for fish 
consumption suppression concept .................................................... 12 
c. EPA’s proposal for tribal subpopulations to be protected to the 
same risk as the general population is scientifically invalid. ........... 16 
d.  The proposed rule creates new, ambiguous designated uses, for 
which the “science” to protect such “uses” is not established ....... 21 
e.  The economic analysis does not reflect the scientific complexity 
of the proposed rule and fails to account for the costs to the 
regulated community and delegated state authorities.  .................... 22 
V.  THE PROPOSAL CREATES SIGNIFICANT FEDERALISM CONFLICTS 
THAT EPA HAS NOT ACKNOWLEDGED OR CONSIDERED AND 
IMPLICATES THE “MAJOR QUESTION” DOCTRINE .................................... 23 
VI. THE PROPOSAL COULD UNLAWFULLY CREATE AN ACTIONABLE 
TRUST OBLIGATION ....................................................................................... 25 
a.  Congress has the exclusive authority to create trust obligations 
on behalf of the federal government, and did not do so in the 
CWA ....................................................................................................... 25 
b.  The proposed rule would purport to create a new trust obligation 
where none exists ................................................................................. 26 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  3 | 30 
 
VII.  THE PROPOSED RULE IGNORES EXISTING COURT DECISIONS ON 
TRIBAL TREATIES, FISH AND WATER QUALITY. ........................................ 27 
VIII.  EPA NEEDS TO FOLLOW THE EXAMPLE THE STATE OF IDAHO HAS 
SET. .................................................................................................................. 28 
IX.  SUMMARY ............................................................................................................ 29 
 
 
 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  4 | 30 
 
 
I.  Introduction 
 
On December 5, 2022, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published a 
proposed rule titled, “Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights.” 87 FR 74361 (Dec 5, 2022).  The proposal is intended to modify the 
Clean Water Act (CWA) water quality standards program, promulgated at 40 CFR Part 
131, to create additional requirements for states, tribes, and the federal government when 
promulgating water quality standards.  Water quality standards are the foundation for 
many other CWA programs, including impairment assessments, total maximum daily load 
(TMDL) development, section 401 certifications, effluent limits, and permitting decisions 
under the section 404 and section 402 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
(NPDES) permit programs.   
 
The J.R. Simplot Company (Simplot) is a privately held, global agribusiness corporation 
based in Boise, Idaho.  Simplot is engaged in a number of businesses including vegetable 
and potato processing, farming, mining of phosphate and silica, fertilizer manufacturing, 
fertilizer distribution, ranching, beef cattle feedlots, beef processing, and other enterprises 
related to agriculture.  Simplot has operations throughout the United States, and has been 
a reliable domestic manufacturer and supplier of phosphate nutrients to American 
agriculture for over seven decades.  
  
Simplot’s operations are often subject to the requirements of the CWA, including section 
303 water quality standards and TMDLs; section 401 water quality certification; section 
311 oil spill prevention and response; section 404 dredge and fill permit; and section 402 
discharge permit programs; and, of course, every regulatory interaction with the CWA 
implicates the ever-changing regulatory definition of “waters of the United States” 
(WOTUS).  Thus, this rulemaking is of interest as it has a direct impact on the company’s 
United States operations. 
 
 
II.  Overview of comments  
  
Simplot is supportive of efforts to promote self-determination and economic prosperity 
among tribal communities in Idaho and across the country.  EPA’s proposed rule, though 
couched in those terms and presented as a move to lift up tribal communities, is replete 
with internal inconsistencies, could unlawfully establish an actionable trust obligation on 
the federal government and on states, and, if finalized as proposed, will create new 
burdens on state agencies, create new conflicts between sovereign states and tribal 
nations, and result in considerable new requirements upon the regulated community.  As 
demonstrated below, EPA proposed a rule that is exceeds its statutory authority and is 
not in accordance with the law.  Furthermore, the proposal lacks the scientific rigor 
required by the Clean Water Act in regards to the establishment of water quality 
standards. Simplot respectfully requests that EPA withdraw the proposed rule; engage 
meaningfully with states, who EPA readily acknowledges will bear the burden of any final 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  5 | 30 
 
rule; engage meaningfully with the regulated community; consult with the U.S. Justice 
Department concerning the agency’s ability to create new trust obligations for itself and 
other sovereigns; and reconsider this unlawful effort to broaden the CWA well beyond its 
intended purpose.  
 
 
III. The proposed rule is unlawful 
 
The proposed rule contains numerous internal inconsistencies and legal flaws.  These 
are not minor flaws and, if the rule is finalized as proposed, are likely to result in litigation 
and a remand or vacatur of portions of the proposed rule, if not the rule in its entirety.  
There are very few, if any, changes EPA could make to the rule to minimize or mitigate 
the risk of litigation.  As drafted the proposed rule is arbitrary and capricious and unlawful 
under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). 
 
 
a.  The proposed rule is expansive, but EPA has interpreted it narrowly and has 
failed to consider major aspects of the problems it would be creating 
 
The proposed rule would require states to protect tribal reserved rights when establishing 
water quality standards under the CWA.  The scant preamble, which amounts to less than 
18 pages, would lead a reader to believe that actual implementation of the rule would be 
quite narrow.  The preamble is inconsistent with the proposed regulatory text and must 
be rewritten to acknowledge the significant impacts this rule would have on water quality 
standards and other water management programs, which are overwhelmingly 
administered by the states.   
 
The proposed rule defines “tribal reserved rights” extremely broadly to mean “any rights 
to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either 
expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of 
Federal law.”1 (emphasis added).  The preamble does explain that tribal reserved rights 
“include but are not limited to the rights to fish; gather aquatic plants; and to hunt for 
aquatic-dependent animals...”  This explanation is also extremely broad and does not 
explain the potential scope of such rights.  Tellingly, the agency requests comment on 
what other types of reserved rights it should consider, indicating that EPA does not know 
the extent of rights that could or would be protected under its own proposal.2  The 
preamble then claims that the proposal’s mandate that states and EPA protect these 
expansive reserved rights is likely to have limited application.  The agency’s narrow 
interpretation of its own proposal is unreasonable and fails to consider the very real 
likelihood that this rule would create chaos in the water quality standards program and 
likely generate decades-long litigation.  
 
 
1 Federal Register.  2022.  Vol. 87 (232) p.74,363 
2 Ibid p.74,367 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  6 | 30 
 
The proposal asserts that EPA has only identified “two categories of circumstances where 
compliance with the proposed rulemaking is most likely to necessitate new or revised 
WQS...”3  First, for the development of human health criteria (HHC) that would incorporate 
the “unsuppressed fish consumption rate” and therefore be protective of subsistence 
fishers.  Second, where a reserved right is not already accounted for as a designated use 
or presently attained.4. The effect on HHC development is discussed further in Section 
IV. b and c below.   
 
Concerning designated uses and attainment, the proposal suggests that many states 
already protect tribal reserved rights through water quality standards that provide 
“protection and propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and provide for recreation in and 
on the water.”5  EPA also points to the existing requirement that states adopt water quality 
standards to protect designated uses and states, “where a tribe has the right to hunt an 
aquatic-dependent species, for example, the species may already be protected in 
accordance with this proposed rulemaking by a state’s ‘wildlife’ designated use and 
associated criteria, such that this rulemaking would not require any additional protection 
of that species beyond what is already required under the CWA and EPA’s existing WQS 
regulation.”6  
 
EPA has no basis to make these statements because, elsewhere in the proposal, the 
agency admits that “it may be a complex inquiry to determine if tribal reserved rights apply 
in waters subject to state WQS” but that EPA can help states “determine if there are 
reserved rights, and whether and how they should be applied in the WQS context.”7  In 
other words, EPA has no idea what the substantive or geographic scope of reserved tribal 
rights is across the country, nor how such rights could be interpreted for purposes of 
establishing water quality standards.  Notably, EPA apparently intended to keep the 
proposed rule as broad as possible to capture as many potential rights claims as 
possible.8 The agency’s attempt to downplay the significance of mandating that states 
establish water quality standards to protect an undefined set of tribal reserved rights to 
an undefined standard is dishonest.  
 
The agency’s statements also presume that a tribe with reserved rights would agree that 
a state’s existing generic “wildlife” designated use would suffice to protect asserted 
reserved rights.  The likelihood of disagreement escalates when, as the rule would 
require, states must protect an historic “unsuppressed” expression of a reserved right, for 
example to hunt undefined aquatic-dependent species that may have been more 
abundant in prior generations.  This type of disagreement among sovereigns is likely play 
out in dozens of ways, over dozens of designated uses, in an untold number of 
 
3 Ibid.  p.74,371l 
4 Ibid.  p.74,370-74,371, 
5 Ibid.  p.74,370. 
6 Ibid.  p.74,370. 
7 Ibid.  p.74,367. 
8 EPA-HQ-OQ-2021-0791-0024, Email from EPA staff to Wyoming staff (“There are not currently 
definitions of ‘aquatic’ and ‘aquatic dependent resources’ in 40 CFR Part 131. . . . We are trying not to 
define these terms in a way that could be limiting of or exclude a specific resource that entails a right to 
water quality.”). 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  7 | 30 
 
watersheds across the country. 9  EPA’s claim that it has the ability, let alone the expertise, 
to adjudicate such disputes is not credible, and is discussed further in Sections V and VI 
below.  
 
 
b. The proposal would broadly expand the federal government’s reach into state 
management of waters and other resources  
 
The elephant in the room is the agency’s unlawful failure to consider how this proposal 
would greatly expand EPA’s ability to regulate and interfere with a state’s management 
of water quantity, flow, and other resources.  Water quantity and flow are aspects of water 
management that have long been within the exclusive jurisdiction of states, not the federal 
government.  Disputes over water quantity and water rights in the western part of the 
country go back generations and there is no indication they will resolve any time soon.  
These longstanding disputes foreshadow the new water wars that will erupt from this 
proposal, if finalized.   
 
In one current example, the U.S. Solicitor General, on behalf of the U.S. Department of 
the Interior; Deb Haaland, Secretary of the Interior; the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation; and 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, is seeking to overturn a decision that gives the Navajo Nation 
a breach of trust claim against the Federal government for its failure to provide sufficient 
water for the Navajo Nation to farm its reservation land.  The Navajo Nation’s claims are 
based on implied tribal reserved rights that it argues guarantee a certain quantity of water 
along the Colorado River. State of Arizona, et al., v. Navajo Nation, et al.; Department of 
Interior et al. v. Navajo Nation, et al. (Nos. 21-1484 and 22-51).  This case is set for oral 
argument before the U.S. Supreme Court on March 20, just two weeks after the public 
comment period closes on this proposed rule.  A handful of states have filed amicus briefs 
in support of the Federal government’s position because, if the Navajo Nation’s claims 
are upheld, the quantity of water available and the existing water rights held by those 
states and citizens along the Colorado River will be curtailed. 
 
The Navajo Nation case is critically relevant because it begs the question: what would 
preclude a tribe from asserting a reserved right for a sufficient quantity of flow within a 
waterway and seeking protection of that right through a state water quality standard?  A 
specific quantity of flow could serve a tribe’s reserved right to take a certain quantity or 
species of fish, hunt a large game animal that relies on certain species of fish, grow an 
aquatic-dependent crop such as wild rice, or provide sufficient drinking water to serve 
tribal needs.  According to the proposal, these uses need not be currently attainable, and 
the tribe may not have engaged in these practices in decades or generations due to social 
changes like the need for traditional employment. See e.g., EPA Guidance for Conducting 
 
9 EPA acknowledges this in its Economic Analysis (EA) where it explains that, while EPA does not expect 
tribes to incur any costs to implement the proposed rule, the agency does expect that tribes may “choose 
to incur costs, such as legal fees or costs to complete scientific studies to support their position on the 
scope and nature of their rights and/or water quality necessary to protect them.” EPA EA, November 
2022, 3.  

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  8 | 30 
 
Fish Consumption Surveys (2016).  The answer is, nothing in the proposal would preclude 
a tribe from making such claims, even on waters like the Colorado River that have 
longstanding water rights and related generational disputes.  Yet, the proposal does not 
mention any of these potential implications of the rule, nor does it examine the impact of 
the proposal on sovereign states.  
 
As the Navajo Nation case demonstrates, these are not far-fetched outcomes from the 
proposal.  If a tribe asserts an implied reserved right for fishing salmon, would EPA require 
a state to establish a designated use for “salmon fishing,” and require a specific seasonal 
or monthly flow rate?  For an asserted reserved right to grow wild rice, would EPA require 
the state to establish a “wild rice” designated use over a wet area of land and require a 
certain quantity of water flow over that land to grow the crop?  How would these flow and 
quantity-based “water quality standards” interact with the longstanding prior 
appropriations framework for water rights?  How would such standards affect long settled 
(or recently settled) claims for water rights, including in the West, South, Midwest, and 
Eastern United States?  If EPA failed to mandate certain flows or if a tribe disagreed with 
a flow volume that EPA mandates for an asserted reserved right, would that tribe initiate 
legal action arguing that that the state’s standards do not comply with the CWA, or worse 
that the state or EPA has breached its fiduciary duty to protect those reserved rights?  
EPA should also assume that other water users and rights holders, including other states, 
would be deeply involved in any process or dispute over quantity or flow requirements or 
diversions.  
 
The proposal does not indicate that EPA has considered any of these potential outcomes 
from its proposal.  Importantly, the agency’s obligation here is not just to consider and 
reflect on these potential outcomes but, should it proceed to finalize some version of this 
proposal, EPA must avoid interfering with longstanding water and land management 
duties and obligations that fall squarely within the authority and prevue of the states.  The 
failure to consider these major aspects is arbitrary and capricious and unlawful, and the 
proposal to interfere with existing water management programs, including water rights 
and appropriations, is not in accordance with law. 
 
 
c.  States and TAS tribes establish designated uses, not EPA 
 
The CWA requires states to adopt water quality standards, including designated uses, 
but the proposed rule would mandate states and treatment as states (TAS) tribes to adopt 
specific designated uses.  The CWA requires that state water quality standards “shall 
consist of the designated uses of the navigable waters involved and the water quality 
criteria for such waters based upon such uses” and they “shall be such as to protect the 
public health or welfare, enhance the quality of water.” See U.S.C. 1313(c)(2)(A).  When 
establishing water quality standards, states are also required to consider their “use and 
value for public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, 
and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and... their use and value for navigation.” 
Id. EPA’s regulations also provide, “[e]ach state must specify appropriate water uses to 
be achieved and protected.” 40 CFR 131.10(a). 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  9 | 30 
 
 
The proposed rule would replace this state and TAS tribe authority and discretion with a 
mandate from EPA to adopt a specific designated use for state or tribal waters.  Not only 
is this contrary to the discretion that the CWA provides to states and TAS tribes, but the 
proposed provision would create internal inconsistences in the Code of Federal 
Regulations.  EPA has not identified any legal authority allowing it to mandate states to 
adopt certain designated uses, nor has the agency considered the resulting internal 
inconstancies in federal regulation.   
 
 
d.  It is unclear if the proposed rule would influence the pending Supreme Court 
decision or vice versa  
 
The proposal conspicuously fails to acknowledge the Navajo Nation case pending before 
the Supreme Court.  This is troubling for a number of reasons, but principally because 
EPA’s proposed preamble is substantively aligned with arguments the Navajo Nation 
makes in that case; arguments that the Federal government has strenuously refuted in 
its briefs.  It is unclear how EPA is able to propose a rule that directly contradicts legal 
arguments and positions that the U.S. Solicitor General is taking in a case before the 
Supreme Court.  EPA must explain how the federal government can file briefs before the 
Supreme Court disclaiming obligations to protect certain reserved rights and, literally at 
the same time, propose a rule requiring states and EPA to protect those same reserved 
rights.  EPA must also explain whether this proposal, if finalized, would provide the Navajo 
Nation the evidence it needs to prevail in the case.  EPA’s failure to consider the Navajo 
Nation case or explain how the proposed rule would affect the case is arbitrary and 
capricious and unlawful under the APA. 
 
 
e.  It is unclear if Winters implied rights are included in the rule  
 
The proposed rule defines “tribal reserved rights” to include rights held by tribes “either 
expressly or implicitly.” Proposed 131.3(r).  As explained in the proposal preamble,  
“Under Winters v. United States and its progeny, the establishment of a Federal 
reservation (Indian or otherwise) implicitly reserves sufficient water to accomplish the 
purposes of the reservation.  See 207 U.S. 564, 576 (1908); Cappaert v. United States, 
426 U.S. 128, 139 (1976); Arizona v. California, 373 U.S. 546, 597–602 (1963).”, fn 6. In 
other words, the Winters line of cases establishes implied reserved rights like those 
included in the proposed definition of “tribal reserved rights.”  However, the preamble also 
states that, “[t]ribal reserved rights as defined in this proposed rulemaking generally do 
not address the quantification of Winters rights.”10.  The regulatory text and the preamble 
are inconsistent and cannot be finalized as proposed. 
 
First, the agency has not explained what it means for the rule to “generally” not address 
Winters rights.  The preamble does not entirely reject Winters reserved rights, indicating 
 
10 Federal Register. 2022. Vol 87 (232), p.74,363. 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  10 | 30 
 
that such rights would be covered by the proposed rule in some cases.  It is unclear under 
what circumstances the proposed rule would bring Winters rights into the CWA 
framework. Additionally, and perhaps more importantly, the proposed regulation does not 
exclude Winters rights from the definition of tribal reserved rights.  So, regardless of what 
the preamble would “generally” consider covered under the rule or not, the regulatory text 
explicitly includes implied rights, including Winters rights.  If the preamble text is 
inconsistent with the regulatory text, the regulation is what will control in any legal dispute.  
If EPA intends to exclude Winters rights from the definition of tribal reserved rights it must 
do so in the regulatory text, not the preamble.  If EPA does not intend to exclude Winters 
rights from this rulemaking, it must state this clearly in the final rule.  
 
The proposed rule is internally inconsistent and EPA’s failure to consider or explain 
whether or how the Winters implied rights would be incorporated into the CWA programs 
is arbitrary and capricious and unlawful under the APA. 
 
 
IV.  The proposed rule undercuts the use of science and rigorous scientific 
methods to develop water quality standards 
 
The existing CWA programs are more than sufficient to protect water quality, but EPA’s 
proposal fails to acknowledge the significant authority and discretion that states currently 
have to protect waters in their states.  The proposal has not provided any technical, 
scientific, water quality, or public health-based rationale for the proposed rule, nor has 
EPA explained why it no longer believes existing CWA programs and regulations are 
adequately protective of water quality.   
 
 
a. Proposed rule does not use scientific rigor to set water quality standards  
 
In most federal programs, including the water quality standards program, EPA prides itself 
on being a scientific institution, driven by the highest levels of scientific integrity to meet 
the Congressional charge of the various statutes it administers.  Should this proposal be 
finalized as proposed, EPA’s administration of the water quality standards program would 
shift from an orientation of the hard sciences (e.g., chemistry, biology) to one driven by 
social sciences (e.g., anthropology, and cultural and historic investigation).  This shift is 
not one Congress envisioned or authorized, and it would be inconsistent with other 
longstanding water quality standards regulations that EPA has not proposed to modify.  
The proposed rule is arbitrary and capricious and not in accordance with the law. 
 
Congress gave EPA many roles when it enacted the CWA, including obligations in 
CWA;11 
 
• Section 104 (to conduct and coordinate research, investigations, experiments, 
training, demonstrations, surveys, and studies relating to the causes, effects, 
 
11 See 33. U.S.C. §§ 1254, 1267, 1268, 1269, 1270, 1273, and 1314. 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  11 | 30 
 
extent, prevention, reduction, and elimination of pollution; to develop and issue to 
states the “latest scientific knowledge available” regarding the presence of 
pesticides in water); 
• Sections 117, 118, 119, 120, 121 (to make scientific inquiry into water quality 
concerns in specific waters and watersheds); and  
• Section 304 (to develop and from time to time revise criteria for water quality 
“accurately reflecting the latest scientific knowledge…on the kind and extent of all 
identifiable effects on health and welfare…on the concentration and dispersal of 
pollutants, or their byproducts, through biological, physical, and chemical 
processes…on the effects of pollutants on biological community diversity, 
productivity, and stability…”).   
 
To implement these Congressional mandates and relevant to the proposed rule, EPA 
promulgated regulations that require water quality standards be based on "sound 
scientific rationale" and "scientifically defensible methods.”12  
 
Neither the CWA nor EPA’s regulations define the terms “sound scientific rationale” or 
“scientifically defensible methods.”  However, EPA has made clear that water quality 
standards are to be based on data and scientific information derived from the hard 
sciences, including chemistry and biology, with a focus on science, science policy, and 
risk management. See e.g., 2000 EPA Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality 
Criteria for the Protection of Human Health (2000 Methodology) (“When EPA speaks of 
science or scientific analysis, it is referring to the extraction of data from toxicological or 
exposure studies and surveys with a minimum of judgment being used to make inferences 
from the available evidence.”); 2002 Human Health Criteria Recommendations (“Water 
quality criteria developed under section 304(a) are based solely on data and scientific 
judgments on the relationship between pollutant concentrations and environmental and 
human health effects. Section 304(a) criteria do not reflect consideration of economic 
impacts or the technological feasibility of meeting the chemical concentrations in ambient 
water.”); 2015 Human Health Criteria Recommendations (“EPA’s recommended water 
quality criteria are scientifically derived numeric values that EPA determines will generally 
protect aquatic life or human health from the adverse effects of pollutants in ambient 
water.”).  These documents demonstrate that the foundation for water quality standards 
is science-based.  
 
Additionally, although not directly on point, CWA section 311 defines the term “best 
available science” to mean “science that (A) maximizes the quality, objectivity, and 
integrity of information, including statistical information; (B) uses peer-reviewed and 
publicly available data; and (C) clearly documents and communicates risks and 
uncertainties in the scientific basis for such projects.”  See 33 U.S.C. §1321(a)(27)  An 
argument could be made that if Congress intended all CWA programs to adhere to this 
level of scientific rigor, it would have explicitly required it in the statute.  The 
counterargument is, Congress was very clear in section 311 what it thought “best 
available science” means and, although it did not define this term elsewhere in the CWA, 
this definition should be a starting point for how EPA interprets similar words and phrases 
 
12 40 CFR 131.5(a)(2), 131.11(a)(1), 131.11(b)(iii). 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  12 | 30 
 
used in the CWA, and a starting point for understanding what EPA meant when it 
promulgated regulations requiring water quality standards be based on sound science 
and be scientifically defensible.  To date, EPA’s regulations and other actions have been 
largely consistent with the definition of “best available science” in section 311. 
 
b.  Water quality data provide no to very limited support for fish consumption 
suppression concept  
 
In the proposed rule, EPA would require states to protect an “unsuppressed” expression 
of reserved rights, including an historic or “heritage” rate of fish consumption.  To the 
extent consumption is suppressed because of societal changes that have occurred since 
settlement, including the modern economy and the opportunity to purchase necessities, 
these considerations fall well outside of the CWA’s science-driven framework and would 
undermine the longstanding scientific basis of the water quality standards program. 
The concept of “suppression” is whether the levels of contamination in game fish 
“suppress” fish consumption rates – especially by tribes or sub-populations that might 
consume for fish than the general population.13  A similar concept is that historically 
subpopulations had higher fish consumption rates, but these “heritage rates” are no 
longer possible due to either “suppression” or lack of available fish.  The corollary is that 
by reducing contaminant levels in fish (via more stringent water quality standards) then 
“suppression” is decreased since more fish can be consumed safely and that improved 
water quality will result in more fish.  These concepts (theories) need to be rigorously 
tested by available data on contaminants in fish and water to determine if they are valid. 
 
To evaluate the concept of suppression, health-advisories for fish consumption in Idaho 
were reviewed.  As described in Appendix A, there is one state-wide advisory for bass 
consumption and 22 water body-specific advisories for consumption of various other 
species.  All these advisories are based on mercury, with two exceptions: 
 
• Lake Coeur d’Alene, which has advisories based on arsenic and lead in addition 
to mercury; and  
• East Mill Creek for selenium. 
 
A fish consumption advisory is based on when concentrations of a contaminant exceed 
risk thresholds based on consuming monthly 8.5 meals (4 ounces uncooked per meal) of 
fish per month.  This equates to a fish consumption rate of 32 grams per day.  The risk 
threshold is adjusted for sensitive populations (children and pregnant women); this may 
reduce the fish consumption.  It should be noted, as shown in Table 1 of Appendix A, for 
the general population more than 8.5 meals per month of fish can be eaten for most of 
the waters that have fish advisories.14  Thus, it is unlikely that fish contaminant 
concentrations have any measurable “suppression” effect on the consumption rates of 
 
13 The assumption is that the contaminants present in the fish came from the contaminants present in the 
water. 
14 This is equivalent to 32 grams/day of fish. 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  13 | 30 
 
Idaho game fish.  Idaho’s human health water quality standards are based on fish 
consumption rate of 66.5 grams per day.   
 
What is the source of mercury that has resulted in these fish consumption advisories?  
The State of Idaho conducted a study looking at mercury concentrations in Idaho’s waters 
and fish, concluding that atmospheric deposition was responsible for mercury in Idaho’s 
waters.15  Specifically that air emission sources in eastern Oregon and northern Nevada 
were likely regional sources of airborne mercury being deposited in Idaho’s waters.16  
Such a finding is similar to other research.  Peterson, in a comprehensive look at mercury 
concentrations in fish throughout the West concluded “our findings suggest that 
atmospheric deposition is a key factor relative to fish tissue mercury concentrations 
across the western U.S.”17  Work conducted by Abbott et al. identified deposition of 
mercury coming from global (trans-Pacific), natural (volcanoes, naturally enriched 
substrates, geothermal areas, and regional wildfires) and anthropogenic (combustion, 
cement and mining) sources.18  In particular for Salmon Falls Creek Reservoir, Abbott 
concluded that regional sources of the atmospheric mercury were from natural sources 
and anthropogenic activities (mines in northern Nevada and combustion/cement sources 
in western Utah).  Thus, making changes in Idaho’s water quality standards will not affect 
these sources and will not change state-wide mercury concentrations in bass and similar 
fish. 
 
Finally, it needs to be noted that bass, perch, bullhead, walleye and a number of the other 
fish species listed in Appendix A for fish advisories are non-native fish.19  Thus, these fish 
species would not have been available for “heritage” consumption by tribal members.   
 
There have been documents prepared to try to determine “heritage” or “suppression 
rates.”  A review of such information prepared for a State of Idaho water quality 
rulemaking from 2014-2016 (see Appendix B) shows that information in such documents 
has not gone through a rigorous scientific validation process (similar to the process that 
current fish consumption rate studies go through) and thus is too speculative and 
unreliable in setting water quality standards.  We note that EPA has published protocols 
for conducting fish surveys and for quantifying fish consumption rates around the United 
States.20  These studies represent the most current and best available methods for 
quantifying fish consumption rates in setting human heath criteria.  The focus of these 
studies and methodologies is on obtaining objectively defensible fish consumption rates 
based on current and actual fish consumption.  Hypothetical fish consumption rates are 
 
15 Essig, DA.  2010.  Arsenic, Mercury, and Selenium in Fish Tissue and Water from Idaho’s Major Rivers:  
A Statewide Assessment.  Idaho Department of Environmental Quality. 
16 Likely airborne mercury sources from gold mines in northern Nevada were responsible for the mercury 
found in southern Idaho. 
17 Peterson SA,  and J.V. Sickle.  2007.  Mercury Concentrations in Fish from Streams and Rivers 
Throughout the Western United States.  Environmental Science and Technology.  Vol 41 (1), p.58-65. 
18 Abbott, M.L., C.J. Lin, P. Matian, and J.J. Einerson.  2008.  Atmospheric Mercury Near Salmon Falls 
Creek Reservoir in Southern Idaho.  Applied Chemistry 23: 438-453. 
19 Wallace RL and D.W. Zaroban.  2013.Native Fishes of Idaho.  American Fisheries Society. 
20 See e.g. Estimated Fish Consumption Rates for the U.S. Population and Sub-Population (NHANES 
2003-2010) (EPA 2014); Guidance for Conducting Fish and Wildlife Consumption Survey (EPA 1998).   

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  14 | 30 
 
not considered and therefore none of these studies rely upon suppression or heritage 
rates in quantifying fish consumption rates.   
 
Moreover, use of suppression rates or heritage rates to set water quality standards is 
beyond the minimum requirements of the Clean Water Act.  EPA in this proposed 
rulemaking, defines “heritage rate” as:21 
 
“A heritage rate is the amount of fish consumed prior to non-Indigenous or 
modern sources of contamination and interference with the natural lifecycle 
of fish, in addition to changes in human society.  While it is often thought of 
as a historic rate, it can also be reflective of a current unsuppressed rate.” 
 
Similarly, we are unaware of any accepted or best available methods to collect 
suppression rates that would warrant using such “data” in setting human health criteria.  
On the contrary, EPA has published national recommended human health criteria as well 
as methodologies for states to follow in quantifying fish consumption.  However, it is clear 
that federal rules require that water quality criteria be based on “sound scientific rationale” 
before they can be approved by EPA.  40 CFR 131.11(a)(1).  As noted above use of 
suppression rates in setting human health criteria is not scientifically defensible and there 
are no peer reviewed methodologies that support reliance upon this type of information.  
Accordingly, we believe that reliance upon suppression rates in setting water quality 
criteria would not be based on “sound scientific rationale” and as such do not meet the 
requirements of the Clean Water Act. 
 
As mentioned at the start of this Section (IV.b), EPA makes the argument that one factor 
states need to consider when determining the “unsuppressed fish consumption level 
(rate) is the lack of availability of fish: 
 
“…fish consumption by tribes exercising their treaty-protected right to fish 
for subsistence may be suppressed due to availability of fish….”22 
 
“The unsuppressed level should balance heritage use of a resource with 
what is currently reasonably achievable for a particular waterbody.  For 
example, in determining the unsuppressed level of a resource for the 
purpose of establishing WQS, it may be appropriate to take into 
consideration both the heritage rates of use of that resource and factors that 
have substantially altered the pollutant burden, hydrology, or availability of 
the resource, such that use of the resource at heritage rates is not 
available.”23 
 
Once again, EPA is inviting the use of speculation rather than data, of how changes to 
aquatic systems (dams, water use, natural changes, etc.) should be used to determine a 
fish consumption rate.  What is the purpose of such made of up numbers?  Such 
 
21 Federal Register.  2022.  Vol.87 (232) p.74,368 
22 Ibid,  p. 74,368. 
23 Ibid.  p. 74,369. 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  15 | 30 
 
speculation is not consistent with the CWA requirement that “(water) criteria must be 
based on sound scientific rationale,...).24  Increasing the FCR, which as discussed earlier 
will result in more stringent water quality standards, will likely in most cases not increase 
the availability of fish.25  Furthermore, the proposed rule language for the water quality 
standards specifically calls out that such standards must protection the availability “of 
aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources.”26  Such language implies that states, as a part 
of the water quality standards, must also address other factors (besides specific criterial 
values) to increase availability of fish.  This is beyond the authority given to EPA under 
the CWA.  And as discussed in Section VII of these comments is in consistent with court 
decisions that address fish availability in the context of treaty obligations. 
 
As EPA is aware, courts afford agencies a substantial degree of deference in the scientific 
methods relied upon or employed in determining appropriate regulatory standards.  See, 
e.g. League of Wilderness Defs.-Blue Mts. Biodiversity Project v. Allen, 615 F.3d 1122, 
1130 (9th Cir. 2010) (“This deference is highest when reviewing an agency's technical 
analyses and judgments involving the evaluation of complex scientific data within the 
agency's technical expertise.”); Sanitary Bd. of Charleston v. Wheeler, 918 F.3d 324, 332 
(4th Cir. 2019) (“[T]he EPA engages in its own calculations and brings its own 
understanding of the most recent science to bear.  This sort of inquiry is a paradigmatic 
example of agency discretion.”); Gifford Pinchot Task Force v. United States Fish & 
Wildlife Serv., 378 F.3d 1059, 1066 (9th Cir. 2004) (holding that an agency's scientific 
methodology is owed substantial deference).  However, EPA does not have special 
expertise in the social sciences or in conducting anthropological studies.  This means that 
EPA actions that are based on these concepts would not enjoy deference that the agency 
may otherwise receive for its science and technology-based agency actions. 
Courts have also acknowledged that EPA’s review of the scientific basis for a state’s 
water quality criteria is limited to determining compliance with the federal water quality 
standards.  If a state’s standards are more stringent than what the CWA requires, EPA 
may approve them without reviewing the scientific support for the increased standards. 
City of Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 415, 426 (10th Cir. 1996) (upholding EPA’s 
approval of standards, despite their departure from the EPA's guidelines, based on a 
Tribe's authority to adopt standards more stringent than the minimum requirements of the 
Clean Water Act.).  Here, EPA is proposing to incorporate into the CWA’s water quality 
standards program new requirements for which there are no objective science-based 
standards.  If the proposed rule is finalized, there would be no clear federal minimum 
requirement for states to achieve.  To be clear, states are currently welcome to develop 
 
24 Ibid.  p. 74,363. 
25 Regulatory processes are already in place to address where anthropogenic impacts to waters of the 
United States result in not achieving water quality standards.  Such processes (TMDLs, CERCLA orders, 
RCRA orders, new permit limits, etc.) are designed to meet the national objective of “restore and maintain 
the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the Nation’s waters,” and to achieve “wherever 
attainable, an interim goal of water quality which provides for the protection and propagation of fish, 
shellfish, and wildlife and provides for recreation in and on the water”  See CWA sections 101(a) and 
101(a)(2).  
26 Federal Register.  2022.  Vol 87 (232) p.74,378; see proposed language at § 131,9(a)(1),   

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  16 | 30 
 
water quality standards that are more stringent than federal standards, and in doing so 
can use less-robust science than the CWA would demand.   
EPA must address these issues and concerns, explain how a state would demonstrate 
compliance with the new reserved right-based federal standard, and explain EPA would 
consider disputes between states and tribes.  EPA has not considered these important 
aspects of the problems created by this proposed rule.    
 
c. EPA’s proposal for tribal subpopulations to be protected to the same risk as the 
general population is scientifically invalid.  
 
For the first time in the 50 years since EPA has been implementing the CWA, the 
proposed rule would require states and TAS tribes to use a particular cancer risk rate.  
The proposal provides no technical or public health support for this change in law and 
policy and provides no legal analysis or precedent showing that the CWA requires these 
changes.  The proposal also does not explain how these major changes will affect water 
quality standards that states must establish.   
 
Historically, states have had discretion to establish cancer risk rates within a range that 
EPA and other federal agencies have determined to be protective of human health.27  
Until this proposal, EPA’s longstanding recommendation has been that states and TAS 
tribes apply a 10-5 or 10-6 risk rate for the general population, and they can apply a higher 
standard of 10-7, but states must ensure that smaller subpopulations are protected to rate 
no lower than 10-4.28  
 
The proposed rule would require states and TAS tribes to set cancer risk rates for tribal 
subpopulations “to at least the same risk level as the general population of the state would 
have been protected…”29  In doing so, the proposal would strip states and TAS tribes of 
the discretion to make risk management and public health decisions.  Additionally, when 
a small subpopulation is protected to 10-5 or 10-6, the general population would actually 
be protected to a rate of 10-7 or 10-8 or higher.  These risk rates have largely been 
dismissed as unnecessarily protective, and EPA has never required the general 
population to be protected to these levels.  Notably, EPA has not provided any rationale 
to support the proposed mandate and has not made a determination that protection to 10-
4 creates an unacceptable human health risk to subpopulations.  EPA’s only justification 
for this change is the agency’s view that a tribe’s sovereign status requires that it be 
protected to the same degree as the general population.  This justification is not sufficient 
under the APA.   
 
EPA has not made a scientific, technical, public health, or legal finding that tribal 
subpopulations require a greater level of risk protection than afforded under EPA’s 
 
27 See e.g., EPA Methodology (2000); 2015 HHC 304(a) criteria. 
28 Ibid. 
29 Federal Register.  2022. Vol. 87 (232) p.74,369. 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  17 | 30 
 
longstanding recommendations.  EPA has not explained why it no longer believes that 
states and TAS tribes are capable of making risk-based decisions.  EPA has also not 
explained why the CWA would require tribal subpopulations to be protected to a greater 
degree than other high consuming subpopulations, for example, subsistence fishers of 
Asian descent or those of any descent in economically disadvantaged communities.  EPA 
has not satisfied its obligations under the APA.   
 
Thus, in this proposed rule there is a serious technical error by EPA for the failure to 
recognize that risks vary among different members of the population; we all eat different 
amounts and kinds of fish.  Faced with this variation, public health policy makers must 
make decisions about the level of protection afforded different segments of the population 
(i.e., the average member of the population, more highly exposed individuals, highly 
exposed subpopulations).  EPA, up until this rulemaking, recognized this variation in 
potential risk and provided guidance on how to address it:   
 
“With AWQC derived for carcinogens based on a linear low-dose 
extrapolation, the Agency will publish recommended criteria values at a 10-
6 risk level. States and authorized Tribes can always choose a more 
stringent risk level, such as 10-7.  USEPA also believes that criteria based 
on a 10-5 risk level are acceptable for the general population as long as 
States and authorized Tribes ensure that the risk to more highly exposed 
subgroups (sport fishers or subsistence fishers) does not exceed the 10-4 
level.”  
 
It is important to recognize that risk varies across the general population and that this has 
implications for what target risk goals can be achieved.  At times a mentioned 
environmental justice goal is “equal protection” for everyone.  It is impossible for water 
quality criteria to provide equal protection for all of the population.  It is an incontrovertible 
fact that the more water a person drinks and the more fish a person consumes, the higher 
will be his or her exposure and lifetime risk.  For a given water quality criterion, each 
individual has a unique exposure and risk because each individual consumes different 
amounts of water and fish from waters regulated by the state over his or her lifetime.  As 
long as each chemical is regulated with a single state-wide criterion, and that criterion is 
not zero, these risks can never be made equal across the population.   
 
Figure 1 shows the risk distributions for the general, angler and two Idaho Indian tribes 
(the Nez Perce and Shoshone Bannock) populations exposed to a hypothetical water 
quality criterion with a concentration equal to X g/L.  This figure demonstrates the relative 
positions of the risk distributions for these four populations.30  While all four risk 
distributions overlap to a large extent, the bulk of the general population has the lowest 
risk, followed by the angler population, Shoshone Bannock population, and Nez Perce 
population, respectively.  These relative positions remain the same regardless of the 
concentration of the hypothetical water quality criterion to which the populations are 
 
30 The distributions were developed using the HHAWQC with the exception that the fish consumption rate 
distributions for the Nez Perce and Shoshone Bannock tribes were adjusted using the results of the recall 
survey and not the FFQ. 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  18 | 30 
 
exposed.  At concentrations equal to 0.01X g/L and 100X g/L of the hypothetical 
chemical, all four risk distributions shift downward by a factor of 100 or upward by a factor 
of 100, respectively.  However, regardless of whether the hypothetical criterion is 
increased or decreased, the risk distributions do not converge, and they never will.  Highly 
exposed populations will always have greater risks no matter how big or small the water 
quality criterion and no single water quality criterion can afford equal protection to 
everyone. 
 
 
 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  19 | 30 
 
Figure 1 
Variation in Risk 
 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  20 | 30 
 
As another example, the Federal Register notice discusses a 865 gram per day fish 
consumption rate (FCR) for the Spokane Tribe.  If a water quality criterion is based on a 
cancer risk factor of 10-5 and a FCR of 865 g/d is adopted and applied to all waters, then 
the general public (who consume at 22.5 grams of fish per day – a 38.5x lower rate) will 
be protected at a 38.5x lower (more stringent) target risk level, 2.6 x 10-7.  So, the tribes 
will not be protected to the same level as the general population.  Such equal protection 
is impossible if the tribes are assumed to consume more fish than the general population.   
 
It is important to understand that criteria for carcinogens are based on chosen risk levels 
that inherently reflect, in part, the exposure parameters used to derive those values.  
Therefore, changing the exposure parameters also changes the risk. Specifically, the 
incremental cancer risk levels are relative, meaning that any given criterion associated 
with a particular cancer risk level is also associated with specific exposure parameter 
assumptions (e.g., intake rates, body weights).  When these exposure parameter values 
change, so does the relative risk.  For a criterion derived on the basis of a cancer risk 
level of 10-6 individuals consuming up to 10 times the assumed fish intake rate would not 
exceed a 10-5 risk level.  Similarly, individuals consuming up to 100 times the assumed 
rate would not exceed a 10-4 risk level.  Thus, for a criterion based on EPA’s default fish 
intake rate (17.5 gm/day) and a risk level of 10 -6, those consuming a pound per day (i.e., 
454 grams/day) would potentially experience between a 10-5 and a 10-4 risk level (closer 
to a 10-5 risk level).  (Note: Fish consumers of up to 1,750 gm/day would not exceed the 
10-4 risk level.  If a criterion were based on high-end intake rates and the relative risk of 
10-6, then an average fish consumer would be protected at a cancer risk level of 
approximately 10-8.  The point is that the risks for different population groups are not the 
same. 
 
The proposed rule is mixing up the concepts of “equal protection of all consumers” (an 
impossible goal, but one that is integral to and ingrained in environmental justice) and 
assigning to tribes a level of protection that has historically been assigned to the general 
population (with the consequence of protecting the general population at a level that is 
10-100x more stringent than the level used historically).  In short, the rule’s “logic” of 
providing tribes the same protect as the general population fatally flawed. 
 
From an implementation standpoint, EPA has also not provided any examples of how this 
risk level requirement could affect the stringency of water quality standards.  Observers 
can readily determine that requiring a cancer risk rate that is orders of magnitude more 
protective will result in water quality standards that are orders of magnitude more 
stringent.  EPA must explain that mandating that states promulgate extremely stringent 
water quality standards is likely to result in vast numbers of waters that do not meet the 
new stringent water quality standards.  This means states and TAS tribes would be 
required to develop and implement TMDLs for hundreds of newly impaired waters and 
establish effluent discharge limits at levels that are likely too low to be detectible with 
standard laboratory testing methods.  In short, the proposal could severely restrict or 
prohibit economic activity in large portions of a state TAS tribe’s territory.  EPA must 
acknowledge this likely outcome and provide a scientific, technical, public health, and 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  21 | 30 
 
legal justification for the proposal and its failure to do so is unlawful and renders the 
proposed rule arbitrary and capricious. 
 
 
d.  The proposed rule creates new, ambiguous designated uses, for which the 
“science” to protect such “uses” is not established 
 
As a part of protecting tribal reserved rights, EPA is now expanding the concept of 
“presently attained use” to cover plants or other aquatic (non-fish, non-wildlife) resources. 
 
“For example, if a tribe has a right to gather an aquatic plant in a state 
waterbody and that use is presently attained, state WQS should already 
reflect that as a designated use, per 40 CFR 131.10(i), and thus this 
resource should be protected in accordance with proposed 40 CFR 
131.9(a).”31 
 
EPA then expands on this concept providing further information as to what is expected 
with these new designated uses. 
 
“… tribal reserved rights to aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources that 
may require more stringent criteria than otherwise required to protect 
applicable designated uses in order to comply with this proposed 
rulemaking and whether there are differential health risks for right holders 
association with activities other than fish consumption such that new or 
revised criteria may be necessary to comply with this proposed 
rulemaking.”32 
 
The issues with this proposed requirement for new designated uses for aquatic-
dependent resources (such as plants) are significant but can be summarized as follows: 
 
• Determining such uses would require tribes to provide information on the plants 
and other aquatic-dependent resources (non-fish) used to the states; and  
• The states would then have to determine what “criteria” would then be needed to 
maintain such resources. 
 
It is Simplot’s experience that tribal nations are often hesitant to share information on 
cultural practices.  Furthermore, if such information was provided to the states, it is not 
clear what information is available then to determine the appropriate criteria.  This 
requirement alone could result in substantial work as state environmental agencies work 
to determine the appropriate criteria for such aquatic-dependent “designated uses.” 
 
For illustrative purposes, let’s discuss an example.  Let’s say that a tribe gathers 
watercress for cultural purposes, from a nearby river on non-Indian land.  Thus, according 
 
31 Federal Register.  2022.  Vol. 87 (232) p.74,370. 
32 Ibid.  p.74,371. 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  22 | 30 
 
to the proposed rule, “watercress gathering” is now a designated use.  Such what criteria 
should be used by the state to protect this use?   
 
• The availability of watercress may be affected by water flows, thus, should the 
state now be regulating the water flow of such river because the availability of 
watercress is an “attained use” which needs to be protected and maintained? 
• What specific pollutant criteria should the state use to ensure that contaminant 
levels do not hinder, or prevent the growth of watercress?  Studies with the 
necessary scientific rigor typically used to determine freshwater and human health 
water quality standards are not typically found for plants and pollutants in aquatic 
environments.  So, either such information will need to be developed or 
considerable assumptions/speculation will be needed to develop the criterial 
required by the proposed rule. 
 
The concept of establishing a designated use for each aquatic-dependent resource used 
by a tribe was never envisioned by the CWA, would likely require EPA or state of water 
flows and/or water allocation and there is not the science to support the development of 
such criteria. 
 
 
e.  The economic analysis does not reflect the scientific complexity of the 
proposed rule and fails to account for the costs to the regulated community and 
delegated state authorities.  
 
The economic analysis makes an attempt to estimate some of the work that will be 
required by the states and TAS tribes to implement the proposed rule.  However, EPA’s 
estimates fully fail to account for:  (a) the intensive “consultation” that will be required with 
tribes; (b) the development of additional technical work to try to estimate “suppressed 
FCR; (c) the recalculation of criteria based on changes to risk factors and FCRs; (d) the 
determination of which waters are now not meeting WQC based on the new calculated 
criteria including the costs associated with determining (i.e., monitoring, etc.); (e) the 
development of total maximum daily loads (TMDLs) for any waters that now do not meet 
any new criteria; (f) any new monitoring needed as to determining progress on TMDLs; 
and (g) major costs to the regulated community associated with new treatment 
requirements to meet more stringent standards (for which treatment technology may not 
be able to achieve) and additional monitoring/analytical costs (which will be very elevated 
by trying to achieve very low method detection limits, etc.). 
 
All of this work is based on the concept (theory) that setting new, more stringent criteria 
will result in more availability of fish or other aquatic-dependent resources and that tribes 
will have additional consumption of fish and other aquatic-dependent resources.  As 
described in Sections IV.b. and IV.c. of these comments, available data indicates that 
such outcomes are not likely.  The reality is that the new criteria will approach, be at, ore 
be less than current and available analytical detection methods.  In other words, actually 
being able to measure such small concentrations in water, fish and effluents may be very 
difficult.  Also, for most pollutants (like the mercury example discussed in Section IV.b), 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  23 | 30 
 
changes in water quality standards and discharge limits are likely to have no to little effect 
on actual concentrations in the water and fish.  Thus, considerable expenditures will have 
occurred with no to little benefit.  An example of this is the Spokane Tribe and PCBs.  The 
preamble discusses the Spokane Tribe setting a fish consumption rate of 865 g/day;33 at 
that FCR the criteria calculated for certain pollutants (like PCBs) is way below scientifically 
valid analytical testing and the ubiquitous nature of PCBs in the environment at those 
concentrations means that very little change in actual concentrations will result from 
additional CWA regulation. 
 
For a meaningful economic analysis, EPA needs to pick several large rivers and calculate 
revised criteria based on the examples given in the preamble (like a FCR at 865 grams 
per day with a cancer slope factor of 10-6 for a tribal population.  Then, EPA should take 
such calculated values and determine what contaminants would not meet the new criteria 
in such waters.  Based with this information, EPA can then determine what TMDLs will 
be needed and how many dischargers will be impacted by trying to meet new discharge 
requirements.  Finally, EPA would need to look at what technology(ies) would be needed 
to meet such criteria and the costs of doing so.  This type of analysis is needed to begin 
to determine a more realistic cost for implementing the proposed rule. 
 
 
V.  The proposal creates significant federalism conflicts that EPA has not 
acknowledged or considered and implicates the “major question” doctrine 
 
EPA has proposed to conclude that the rule “will not have substantial direct effects on the 
states, on the relationship between the national government and the states, or on the 
distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels of government.” 34  This 
proposed conclusion cannot be reasonably or objectively sustained.  Additionally, as an 
executive agency, EPA has only those powers given to it by Congress, and there is no 
evidence that Congress intended EPA to have the expansive powers in the proposal. 
 
When Congress enacted the CWA, it sought to “restore and maintain the chemical, 
physical, and biological integrity of the Nation’s waters” and simultaneously “recognize, 
preserve, and protect the primary responsibilities and rights of states” to mitigate pollution 
and direct development of land and water resources. 33 USC 1251(a), (b).  Indeed, the 
CWA is often referred to as a statute based on a cooperative federalism foundation that 
intends strong partnerships between “the States and the Federal Government.” See e.g., 
New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144, 167 (1992), Arkansas v. Oklahoma, 503 U.S. 
91, 101 (1992).  The proposed rule would all but eliminate this cooperative federalism 
framework in favor of a system where states are subordinate sovereigns in service of 
tribal reserved rights, even where those reserved rights are implied and have not been 
established by a formal treaty or other act of Congress.  This puts states in an untenable 
position that was not considered or envisioned by Congress when it enacted the CWA. 
  
 
33 Ibid.  p.74,369. 
34 Ibid.  p.74,375. 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  24 | 30 
 
As described in other sections, the CWA directs EPA to oversee the various regulatory 
and nonregulatory programs, but states are intended to be the primary administrators of 
these programs. EPA is supposed to establish the floor—the federal minimum 
requirements that the CWA demands and states are obligated to comply with this federal 
minimum, but may choose to enact more stringent programs.  Tribes that obtain TAS 
status have the same CWA rights and responsibilities as states, including to establish 
and protect water quality standards.  Contrary to this long-established framework, the 
proposed rule would for the first time put states in a parens patraie position over tribal 
human health and welfare.  Not only is this unconventional and well outside the CWA 
framework, it would seem to elevate tribal interests over those of the state and even put 
states in the role of trustee over tribal resources, a role that is assigned to the Federal 
government.  If the rule is finalized as proposed, it would significantly disrupt the 
distribution of power and responsibilities among the various levels of government. 
 
The proposal would also establish EPA as the arbiter of disagreements between states 
and tribes.  In other words, EPA will mediate and negotiate disputes between two 
sovereigns over major environmental policy and public health risk management 
decisions.  Not only is there no evidence that Congress envisioned the CWA to be 
implemented in this manner, but EPA is not equipped or authorized to adjudicate such 
disagreements.  We recognize the dispute resolution provision in 40 CFR §131.7, as 
authorized by CWA section 518(e). 33 U.S.C. §1377.  However, that provision only 
authorizes EPA to implement dispute resolution when a state and tribe have different 
water quality standards on a common body of water.  The stringency of a water quality 
standard is appropriately within EPA’s expertise and managing disputes on this topic has 
been authorized by Congress.  However, Congress did not, in section 518(e), authorize 
EPA to arbitrate disagreements among between sovereigns over the meaning of treaties 
and other instruments of federal law.  Finalizing the proposed rule would significantly 
change the relationship between the national government and the states and would 
exceed the authority granted in CWA section 518(e).  
 
Moreover, EPA has not considered the substantial and direct burdens this proposal would 
place squarely on states.  If finalized, the rule would require states to research and identify 
all tribal reserved rights that exist within or across a state’s boundaries, evaluate whether 
those rights are currently protected and to what degree, undertake significant 
engagement with tribes to understand everything from historic fish consumption rates to 
historic hunting and agricultural rates, and then translate those rates into some actionable 
water quality standard.  Information in EPA’s rulemaking docket demonstrates that EPA 
is not planning to do any of this legwork as part of this rulemaking process, leaving it to 
the states to undertake this significant new workload.35  The proposed rule would impose 
significant new burdens on states to investigate tribal reserved rights and develop tools 
to determine an appropriate level of protection for those rights, including implied rights.  
 
35 See EPA-HQ-OQ-2021-0791-0024, Email from EPA staff to Wyoming staff (“EPA is not aware of any 
kind of central repository identifying tribal reserved rights to aquatic or aquatic‐dependent resources 
across the country, nor does EPA intend to gather this information as part of this rulemaking effort. This 
means that while we know of some states where reserved rights issues have come up, we can’t be sure 
about all the locations where the potential rule may or may not be relevant.”). 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  25 | 30 
 
 
EPA’s proposed determination that this rule would not have any federalism implications 
is simply not credible.  In addition, the proposal presents issues of great “economic and 
political significance” and there is no evidence in the CWA, the proposal, or the 
rulemaking docket that Congress granted EPA these authorities. W. Virginia v. Env't Prot. 
Agency, 213 L. Ed. 2d 896, 142 S. Ct. 2587 (2022).  For all of the reasons detailed above, 
the proposed rule violates the APA and easily implicates the “major questions” doctrine.   
 
 
VI. The proposal could unlawfully create an actionable trust obligation  
 
In enacting the CWA, Congress did not create a trust obligation or fiduciary duty for EPA 
to protect tribal water resources. El Paso Nat. Gas Co. v. United States, 750 F.3d 863, 
899 (D.C. Cir. 2014).  Because the CWA itself does not set forth such an obligation or 
duty, EPA has no authority to impose such duties on itself or any other sovereign through 
rulemaking.  Regardless of these constraints on its authority, EPA has proposed a rule 
that mandates all water quality standards established and approved by EPA or states 
“protect tribal reserved rights.”  The proposal could be interpreted to unlawfully create an 
actionable trust obligation where none has been established by Congress.  At a minimum, 
the proposed rule’s language would create an appearance of a trust obligation under the 
CWA, opening the federal government and delegated state authorities to potentially 
significant and prolonged litigation on a question that is easily answered under 
longstanding legal precedent.  It is irresponsible for EPA to propose a regulation that 
could be construed to create trust obligations where it is plain that none exist.  
   
 
a.  Congress has the exclusive authority to create trust obligations on behalf of the 
federal government, and did not do so in the CWA  
 
The Supreme Court has long recognized and repeatedly reaffirmed that “the organization 
and management of the trust is a sovereign function subject to the plenary authority of 
Congress.”  United States v. Jicarilla Apache Nation, 564 U.S. 162, 175-78, 131 S. Ct. 
2313, 2323–25, 180 L. Ed. 2d 187 (2011) (citations omitted).  This means that Congress 
structures the trust relationship with Indian tribes and has done so in statutes that have 
“defined and redefined the trust relationship,” sometimes doing so to serve a narrow 
policy purpose or its own policy goals. Id. (citations omitted).  When Congress establishes 
trust obligations, the applicable statute and implementing regulations “define the contours 
of the United States’ fiduciary responsibilities” and, to assert a violation of such 
obligations, a tribe must be able to identify a “specific, applicable, trust-creating statute or 
regulation that the Government violated.” Id.  As the Federal government has argued in 
the Navajo Nation case, a trust obligation cannot be created by implication. Id. See also 
fn. 2. 
  
Here, the applicable statute is the CWA, and there is no reasonable argument that 
Congress created a trust obligation or fiduciary duty in the CWA, and courts have already 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  26 | 30 
 
ruled that it does not.  In support of its proposed rule, EPA quotes one single provision 
from the CWA concerning treaties: “This Act shall not be construed as… affecting or 
impairing the provisions of any treaty of the United States.”36  The plain language of this 
provision obligates the federal government not to affect and not to impair the provisions 
of any treaty.  This provision contains no affirmative responsibility for EPA or any other 
federal or state agency to manage water resources for the benefit, the best interest, or 
the needs of tribal communities, or any other party to a treaty with the United States.  To 
underscore the mismatch, Section 511 applies to all treaties and does not specifically 
reference tribal treaties or any other instrument of federal law related to tribal rights.  
 
If Congress intended to create a trust obligation or fiduciary duty through the CWA, it 
would certainly know how to do so. See, e.g. United States v. Mitchell, 463 U.S. 206 
(1983) (holding that various timber management statutes create a fiduciary relationship 
between tribes and the federal government, as evidenced by the obligations of the 
government in the management and operation of Indian lands and resources detailed in 
the statutes); see also United States v. Navajo Nation, 537 U.S. 488, 506 (2003) (“[A] 
tribe must identify a substantive source of law that established a specific fiduciary or other 
duties...Although the undisputed existence of a general trust relationship between the 
Unites States and the Indian people can “reinforce” the conclusion that the relevant 
statute or regulation imposes fiduciary duties, that relationship alone is insufficient. . .”); 
United States v. White Mt. Apache Tribe, 537. U.S. 465, 471 (2003) (holding that the 
General Allotment Act creates nothing more than a “bare trust” and thus there is “no 
predicate in the statutes or regulations identified by the Tribe for finding a fiduciary 
obligation...”).  In short, a statute must unambiguously create a fiduciary duty and 
Congress did not do so in the CWA.  
 
 
b.  The proposed rule would purport to create a new trust obligation where none 
exists 
 
EPA’s proposed rule contains the very type of language that the Supreme Court has 
concluded in other contexts creates specific and actionable trust obligations.  Specifically, 
proposed 40 CFR §131.9(a) states, “Water quality standards must protect tribal reserved 
rights applicable to waters subject to such standards.”37 (emphasis added).  The proposal 
preamble explains EPA’s view that, “[w]here tribes have reserved rights to aquatic and/or 
aquatic-dependent resources, protection of such rights falls within the ambit of [the 
CWA’s] broad statutory directives and objectives...”38 (emphasis added).  EPA argues 
that the discretion afforded it to implement the CWA allows EPA to create a mandatory 
obligation to protect “all applicable reserved rights.”  Under the proposal, a failure by either 
EPA or a state to protect all such applicable reserved rights would be judicially 
enforceable and akin to a trust obligation.  The proposed rule stands in contrast to a large 
body of constitutional case law that requires specific language from Congress to create 
 
36 33 U.S.C. 1371(a) 
37 Federal Register.  2022.  Vol 87 (232) p.74,378. 
38 Ibid.  p. 74,365. 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  27 | 30 
 
obligations for states and the federal government to protect reserved tribal rights within 
the CWA framework.   
 
Even more concerning than EPA’s assertion that it has the discretion to establish 
enforceable obligations related to tribal rights is that the proposed rule does not attempt 
to define the universe of reserved rights that must be protected or describe the degree of 
protection required.  Nor does the proposal explain how a state could or should go about 
identifying the universe of reserved rights or a scientific method for understanding how 
such rights “must be” protected.  EPA has failed to consider major aspects of the problem 
and has failed to sufficiently explain the proposed rule or the agency’s rationale for 
changing the water quality standards program.   
 
 
VII.  The Proposed Rule Ignores Existing Court Decisions on Tribal Treaties, Fish 
and Water Quality. 
 
EPA’s proposed rulemaking predisposes (assumes) that tribal treaties39 provide these 
“tribal reserved rights” in relation to water quality and fish.  During a 2014-2016, water 
quality rulemaking in Idaho, there was an assertion by several stakeholders that tribes 
have a legally protected property interest associated with treaty right rights to take fish in 
usual and accustomed places, including the preservation of the physical condition of fish 
taken.  For example, in its January 16, 2015 letter to the Idaho Department of 
Environmental Quality (Idaho DEQ), the Columbia River Inter Tribal Fish Commission 
(CRITFC) stated, “Tribal rights to fish are guaranteed in treaties with the United States. 
CRITFC’s member tribes ceded roughly one-third of the Columbia Basin to the United 
States government, but forever retained the right to take fish from these waters.  Implicit 
in the treaty promises of 1855 was the understanding that the fish taken would be healthy 
and safe to eat”.  Additionally, the Nez Perce Tribe asserted that its treaty rights included 
“a legally protected property interest” covering both access to usual and customary places 
and the taking of fish destined for those places.  
 
These representations are not supported by federal law interpreting the Nez Perce Tribe’s 
1855 treaty rights concerning the right to fish (see Appendix C – which was prepared for 
the 2014-2016 rulemaking).  In Nez Perce Tribe v. Idaho Power Co., the court held that 
the Nez Perce Tribe “does not own the fish runs or the fish but rather, it owns a treaty 
right to take fish from its usual and customary places as specified in the 1855 treaty.”  
Moreover, the Court found that “Indian tribes do not have an absolute right to the 
preservation of the fish runs in their original 1855 condition, free from all environmental 
damage caused by the migration of increasing numbers of settlers and the resulting 
development of land.”  The court went on to state that “the Tribe’s right to fish pursuant 
to the 1855 Stevens treaty only guarantees access to certain off-reservation fishing 
grounds and the right to attempt to catch available fish.  The Stevens treaties require that 
any development authorized by the states which injures the fish runs be non-
 
39 EPA is taking a very, very broad interpretation of what is legally binding in regards to tribal treaties.  
See Federal Register. 2022, Vol. 87 (232) p.74,363.   

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  28 | 30 
 
discriminatory in nature, but does not however, guarantee that subsequent development 
will not diminish or eventually, and unfortunately, destroy the fish.”  The Court’s ruling is 
consistent with Blackfeet, etc. Nations or Tribes of Indians, in which the Court of Claims 
held that “the right to hunt the common grounds did not include ‘any terms guaranteeing 
to the Indians a maintenance of the status quo for almost a century.”  Therefore, 
representations that treaty rights implicitly include the right to take fish of a certain quantity 
or condition is not supported by court decisions examining this question.  
 
 
VIII.  EPA needs to follow the example the State of Idaho has set. 
 
As described in these comments, Simplot recommends that EPA not move forward with 
the proposed rule.  EPA has proposed the question of whether water quality standards 
need clarification to protect aquatic and aquatic dependent resources reserved to tribes 
through treaties, statutes, executive orders or other sources of Federal law.  However, it 
is not EPA’s role to step in as the interpreter of treaties to decide how the Clean Water 
Act may apply to numerous tribal treaties.  As described in Section VII of these comments, 
the courts have already addressed the “objectives” that EPA is now trying to achieve 
through this rulemaking.  The CWA does not provide the legal basis for this rulemaking 
and court decisions do not neither. 
 
Thus, our recommendation is that if EPA believes that further work is needed to assure 
water quality designated uses, especially for human health for certain populations, are 
being met, an appropriate action would be guidance to the Regions and delegated States 
and TAS Tribes.  Potential topics for such a memorandum is updating the status (data) 
of contaminants in water and fish, using valid scientific methods determining fish 
consumption rates (including sub-population groups such as tribes), understanding the 
basis of fish consumption advisories and taking a look at how any such advisories are 
related to activities regulated by the Clean Water Act 
 
The State of Idaho provides an example of doing this.  There were regulatory and 
designated use questions on the levels of certain metal and metalloid contaminants in 
fish and water that required study.  Furthermore, potential updates for human health water 
quality criteria needed examination.  To address these, the State of Idaho did the 
following: 
 
• Extensive studies were done looking at concentrations of mercury, arsenic, and 
selenium in fish tissue and water in Idaho’s major river systems.  Several different 
studies were done over a period of years to gather this data. 
• The data was carefully analyzed.  This analysis included understanding how these 
contaminants are mobilized in the aquatic environment and the source of these 
contaminants.  As discussed earlier, a primary water (and fish) contaminant of 
concern is mercury; the State of Idaho concluded that aerial deposition is the likely 
source of the contamination in Idaho’s waters and fish.  Thus, further regulation of 

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  29 | 30 
 
mercury via Clean Water Act requirements would not in any meaningful way 
change these concentrations in fish and water. 
• Finally, two scientific rigorous surveys were done of the Idaho population, including 
tribal members, to provide current, updated information on fish consumption rates.  
DEQ derived a FCR of 66.6 grams per day for use in calculating human health 
criteria.  The FCR represents the mean (equivalent to the 70th percentile) of the 
consumption by the Nex Perce Tribe.  [The Nez Perce Tribe is the highest 
consuming tribal subpopulation].  This FCR was determined using the National 
Cancer Institute methods based on species of CWA relevance (freshwater, near 
coastal and estuarine species) and represents approximately the 95th percentile of 
the Idaho general population and the 90th percentile of the angler population 
consumption rate of all fish. 
• Finally, the information gathered from the studies (contaminant concentrations in 
water and fish and the FCR) was then used to update the human health water 
quality criteria. 
 
This work performed by the State of Idaho over approximately a twelve (12) year 
period has provided the scientific data to understand the status of these contaminants 
in Idaho’s water and fish, determine what current fish consumption rates were, 
evaluate what potential CWA actions could address fish consumption advisories and 
finally update human health criteria.  This process provides scientifically robust criteria 
that is protective of all Idaho citizens, including tribes. 
 
 
IX.  Summary 
 
EPA states in the preamble that:40 
 
“These revisions to EPA’s existing WQS regulation are intended to provide 
clarity, predictability, and transparency in EPA’s review of state WQS and 
promulgation of Federal WQS in waters where reserved rights to aquatic 
and/or aquatic dependent resources apply.” 
 
This proposed rule does the exact opposite of its stated objective.  The proposal has 
significant legal, technical and implementation deficiencies. 
 
• The CWA never envisioned EPA have this expansive role of interpreting Tribal 
treaties and creating new obligations on behalf of the federal government and 
states. 
• The proposed rule is in direct opposition to the position taken by the United States 
in the State of Arizona, et al., v. Navajo Nation, et al.; Department of Interior et al. 
v. Navajo Nation, et al. 
 
40 Federal Register.  2022.  Vol. 87 (232) p.74,366.  

Proposed Rule on WQS and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by the J.R. Simplot Co. 
 
P a g e  30 | 30 
 
• The objectives purported to be obtained through this rulemaking have already 
been addressed by the courts.  These court decisions have soundly rejected what 
EPA is attempting to do with this rulemaking:  creating obligations under the CWA 
for certain quantities of fish and trying to mandate water quality conditions that 
might have existed over 175 years ago. 
• Technical concepts embedded in this rulemaking such as tribal fish consumption 
rate being limited by “suppression” due to poor water quality or that HHWQC are 
set at a cancer risk factor that is not protective of sub-populations (such as tribes) 
are not supported by a rigorous scientific examination. 
• The proposed rule fails to describe the implications of adjusting WQS for 
“suppression”, setting cancer risk factors at 10-5 or 10-6 for sub-populations, and 
creating new designated uses for "aquatic-dependent resources” such as plants.  
The likely outcome of these changes will be new criteria values that are very 
stringent to the point where there will be analytical measurement difficulties and 
lack of technology to treat to these low concentrations.  The results will be 
significant additions to the ‘impaired waters list” (CWA Section 303(d) list) and 
millions upon millions spent by the regulated community to try to achieve a “paper 
value” WQC that may not be able to be measured accurately, has a minimal benefit 
to the environment and likely will not increase fish availability or consumption. 
• The economic costs of implementing this rule for both the delegated authorities 
and the regulated community have not been determined.  These costs though will 
be in the millions of dollars with little evidence of benefits to the nations’ water 
quality. 
• The proposed rule purports through changes to WQS and other measures (such 
as potentially regulating water flows)41 to increase fish consumption by tribes by 
increasing the availability of fish and reducing the contaminants in fish.  Setting 
aside the legal question of what authorities EPA has to do this, EPA has not shown 
or provided any examples that such measures are really achievable.   
• The proposed rule interferes with state authorities including the setting of 
designated uses and water allocation.  A major example is the requirement to 
create a new category of designated uses for “aquatic-dependent resources.” 
 
The extent and magnitude of these deficiencies is such that this rulemaking should be 
stopped.  Moving forward with finalizing this rule will result in significant regulatory 
confusion, create significant burdens on the states, TAS tribes and the regulated 
community and ultimately extensive litigation.  Simplot recommends that EPA use an 
approach of cooperation rather than control in regards to HHWQC and subpopulations 
(such as tribes).  The State of Idaho has done considerable work in this area and offers 
an example that can be used by EPA. 
 
41 EPA in the preamble (pages 74,368 and 74,369) discusses designating waters for wild rice production 
in the Great Lakes area, including designating waters that currently do not support wild rice production.  
EPA then invites what changes can be made to “restore” the hydrological regime to support wild rice 
production.  Though EPA does acknowledge that hydrological changes and legacy contamination have 
occurred, EPA is clearly (such as through a 303(d) listing process, looking for States to implement plans 
which include hydrological changes to try to remedy “suppression” and “availability” of aquatic and 
aquatic-dependent resources that EPA believes are tribal reserved rights.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0286 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Mike Crapo 
United States Senator 
239 Dirksen Senate Office Bldg. 
Washington, D.C.  20510 
 
James E. Risch 
United States Senator 
483 Russell Senate Office Building 
Washington, D.C. 20510 
 
 
Mike Simpson 
Member of Congress 
2084 Rayburn House Office Bldg. 
Washington, D.C. 20515 
 
Russ Fulcher 
Member of Congress 
1520 Longworth House Office Bldg. 
Washington, D.C. 20515 
 
 
March 3, 2023 
 
Mr. Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington D.C.  20460 
 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
 
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recently issued a new proposed rule, Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights. This proposed rule dramatically impinges on states' 
rights to develop water quality standards for state waters as specifically reserved to the states by Congress in 
the Clean Water Act.  
 
The proposed rule asserts that states must now take into consideration tribal treaty rights outside of designated 
reservations in setting state water quality standards, a substantial change to federal interpretation of the Clean 
Water Act not based on any revisions to the law. Rather it is based on EPA's attempt to mandate a result 
based on treaty right interpretation--an area where the agency has no jurisdiction or expertise.  The Clean 
Water Act does envision a role for Tribes to set water quality standards within reservation boundaries under 
the treatment of state provisions of the Clean Water Act, and many Tribes have taken advantage of these 
provisions. However, there is nothing in the Clean Water Act that mandates Tribes must be part of the state 
water quality standards-setting process outside treaty land. The EPA proposal clearly encroaches on state 
sovereignty under the Clean Water Act and the U.S. Constitution. 
 
Additionally, the mandate in the proposed rule as to how states must set water quality standards for state 
waters based on implied tribal treaty rights is equally problematic.  Rather than requiring states to analyze 
current conditions of state waters, the proposed rule mandates that when setting water quality standards, 
states must now consider, or speculate, what water quality and aquatic resource conditions were when Tribal 
treaties were executed in the middle of the 19th century. This unprecedented requirement directs states to 
essentially ignore development over the last 175 years and set water quality standards accordingly whether 
such requirements are attainable or not. Nothing in the Clean Water Act mandates such a result, clearly 
indicating this proposed rule to be a severe overstep by the EPA. If such a requirement becomes part of the 
state standard-setting process, the ability for Idaho industries, businesses, and municipalities to economically 
operate within the law will be substantially affected.    
 
The proposed rule will uniquely impact Idaho due to recent legal developments within the state. Between 2014 
and 2019, the state of Idaho undertook a lengthy and comprehensive water quality standard-setting process 
that included engaging a statewide fish consumption study to set water quality standards, with consideration 
for modern Tribal fish consumption rates. Although the EPA balked at approving these science-based 
standards for the same reasons articulated in the new proposed rule, the standards were ultimately approved. 
The proposed rule would clearly undermine Idaho's extensive and collaborative efforts.  
 
Additionally, the proposed rule, which is based on the premise that Tribal treaties imply reserved rights to water 
quality in state waters outside reservations, could have significant and concerning implications for water 
quantity by suggesting that treaties give Tribes an implied reservation to water rights outside the Reservation.  

Although such broad claims were raised in the Snake River Basin Adjudication by the United States, they were 
soundly rejected by Idaho courts. This proposed rule would now embolden similar claims to be raised again 
throughout the state of Idaho, putting vested water rights at major risk.   
 
The proposed rule is a substantial overreach by the EPA beyond anything Congress ever envisioned.  The 
proposed rule must not go forward. We look forward to your action and response.    
 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
                      
 
                    JAMES E. RISCH 
                 United States Senator 
 
   MIKE CRAPO 
                              United States Senator 
 
                      MIKE SIMPSON           
                   Member of Congress                                 
RUSS FULCHER 
 Member of Congress

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0256 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
 
Uploaded to Federal Rulemaking Portal: www.regulations.gov/commenton/EPA-HQ-OW-2021-
0791-0001 and sent by electronic mail to Brundage.jennifer@epa.gov 
Jennifer Brundage 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Water, Standards and Health Protection Division (4305T) 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
RE:  
EPA Proposed Rule on Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to 
Protect Tribal Reserved Rights  
Docket ID No.: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
Please accept these comments on behalf of the Seminole Tribe of Florida (“Seminole Tribe”) on 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (“Proposed Rule”). The Seminole Tribe is a federally-
recognized Indian Tribe organized pursuant to Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
1934, 25 U.S.C. Section 461 et seq. (2022)(as amended). The Seminole Tribe holds federally 
reserved usual and customary rights to hunt, fish, frog, and trap on thousands of acres of land 
throughout the historic Everglades.  See Seminole Indian Lands Claim Act of 1987, Pub. L. No. 
100-228 (1987) (codified at 25 U.S.C.  §1772c, 1772d, 1772e, 1772f, and 1772g (2022)); Big 
Cypress National Preserve Enabling Legislation, Pub. L. No. 93-440 (1974)(codified at 16 U.S.C. § 
698j (2023)); Everglades National Park Enabling Legislation, Pub. L. No. 83-267 (1934)(codified at 
16 U.S.C. § 410b (2023)). Maintenance and preservation of the resources reserved to the 

 
 
Seminole Tribe are a priority.  Consequently, the Seminole Tribe has been closely following the 
development of water quality standards (“WQS”) protection for tribal reserved rights across the 
country. 
In 2016 the Seminole Tribe challenged revisions proposed by the Florida Department of 
Environmental Protection (“FDEP”) to the State of Florida’s human health-based water quality 
criteria. The Seminole Tribe’s primary concerns focused on the proposed revisions’ failure to 
adequately protect the resources to which the Seminole Tribe held reserved rights for customary 
use.  The Tribe’s concerns included 1) FDEP’s WQS fish consumption rate did not account for a 
rate of fish consumption among Tribal members that reflected eating habits that were 
unsuppressed;  2) FDEP’s proposed WQS exposed subsistence-level fish consumers, i.e., Seminole 
Tribe members exercising their reserved rights, to a greater level of risk than average fish 
consumers in Florida;  and 3) FDEP’s WQS failed to account for Tribal members’ consumption 
habits of aquatic wildlife such as whole animal consumption and higher trophic level species like 
turtles, alligators, and their eggs.  The Seminole Tribe’s challenge relied in pertinent part on EPA’s 
Reserved Rights Policy that forms the basis for the Proposed Rule.  Ultimately, FDEP rescinded its 
proposed revisions with an acknowledgement of the need to address fish consumption concerns, 
however the Tribe’s concerns remain. 
The Seminole Tribe supports EPA’s Proposed Rule governing the setting and review of state WQS 
because EPA is addressing the issues raised by the Seminole Tribe in the Florida rulemaking. The 
Seminole Tribe supports the addition of 40 C.F.R. Section 131.9, which requires that WQS in areas 
with tribal reserved rights protect the exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water 
quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource; and to protect the health of 
the right holders to at least the same risk level as provided to the general population of the State.  
However, the Proposed Rule does not establish nationally applicable thresholds for 
unsuppressed levels or use of a resource due to the different factors affecting water quality and 
availability of the resources for a particular group. The preamble to the Proposed Rule 

 
 
recommends that the unsuppressed level should balance heritage use of a resource with what is 
currently reasonably achievable for a particular water body. The Seminole Tribe recommends 
that this balancing weigh heavily toward heritage rates of consumption to the extent practicable. 
For example, the Seminole Tribe’s Reserved Rights are throughout the historic Everglades which 
is the focus of the Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Program, a multi-year, multi-billion-
dollar program to restore water quality, water quantity, timing and flows to the historic 
Everglades. As the preamble to the Proposed Rule notes “the unsuppressed level or use of a 
resource should account for situations where restoration efforts that are planned or underway 
(e.g., efforts to improve habitat or reduce contamination), such that it would be reasonable to 
expect the opportunities for use of the resource to increase in the future.” Proposed Rule 
Preamble at 74,369. EPA should make clear in the final Rule and preamble that in balancing 
heritage use of a resource against what is currently reasonably achievable, the heritage use rates 
should favor outcomes that are as protective of heritage rates as possible, especially in the 
context of restoration. 
The science is clear that bioaccumulation of mercury is a primary threat to all tribal members in 
southern Florida (Scheidt et al. 2021). Methylated mercury presents an elevated threat over the 
form of elemental mercury that is the predominant constituent of atmospheric deposition in 
southern Florida. When elevated phosphorus levels lead to increased dissolved organic carbon 
in freshwater marshes, these hydrocarbons complex with sulfur and are responsible for the 
methylation (and associated enhanced toxicity) of mercury.  For this reason, effective regulation 
of sulfur and phosphorus in surface waters is necessary to meaningfully protect aquatic 
organisms and tribal members from bioaccumulation of methyl mercury in natural areas.  
Focusing on defining and regulating appropriate levels of phosphorus and sulfur are essential for 
protecting tribal reserved rights. Defining the appropriate color (or clarity) of surface waters is 
also needed.  The clear water that has been characteristic of Florida’s natural areas for centuries 
is a solid indicator of low dissolved carbon levels and is an essential part of meaningfully 
protective environmental regulation in our region. 

 
 
The Seminole Tribe supports EPA’s proposed definition for “tribal reserved rights” to be “any 
rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly 
or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of Federal law.”  
Proposed Rule, 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(r).  This broad definition is critical to the Seminole Tribe because 
it captures many more aquatic dependent resources such as turtles, alligators, and their eggs, 
that Seminole Tribe members historically consumed.  Water quality criteria that do not account 
for a broad spectrum of aquatic and aquatic dependent resources may not sufficiently protect 
water in the areas where these rights are reserved, resulting in damage to the resources and 
further suppression of the Seminole Tribe’s ability to preserve its cultural heritage.  
The Seminole Tribe’s knowledge of its preferred food sources, the quality of the water from 
which food was drawn, and the condition of the landscape within which the Seminole Tribe has 
thrived for generations are all included within the Tribe’s portfolio of Indigenous Traditional 
Ecological Knowledge (ITEK).  The close bond between the Seminole Tribe, the landscape, and 
the plants and animals with whom the Tribe coexists has sustained the Tribe for centuries.  The 
Seminole Tribe seeks to maintain this close bond and views it as central to their continued ability 
to thrive as a people.  The Seminole Tribe supports the White House’s November 15, 2021 
Memorandum for the Heads of Departments and Agencies relating to ITEK.  The connection 
between ITEK and policies developed by Federal agencies presents a clear opportunity for us to 
move forward toward a healthier environment with the recognition of Native American tribes as 
effective stewards of the natural landscapes of North America.  Meaningful coordination with 
Tribal representatives ensures that ITEK will be properly integrated within the Proposed Rule. 
On December 1, 2022, the EPA issued an Administrator’s Determination that new and revised 
Human Health-Based Criteria are necessary to protect against adverse human health effects 
related to pollutants in Florida’s surface waters. We would like to note that the Seminole Tribe’s 
Reserved Rights include waters that will be affected by the Administrator’s Determination. We 
urge EPA to finalize the Proposed Rule on Water Quality Standards to Protect Tribal Reserved 

 
 
Rights in time for it to be a part of the process of promulgating new and revised human health-
based water quality criteria in Florida. 
The Seminole Tribe looks forward to continued coordination and consultation on the Proposed 
Rule.  If you have any questions regarding this letter, please contact Stacy Myers, Acting Director 
of the Seminole Tribe’s Environmental Resource Management Department (ERMD) at (561) 710-
1628 or stacymyers@semtribe.com.  
 
Respectfully, 
 
Dr. Paul N. Backhouse, Ph.D., RPA 
Senior Director, Heritage and Environment Resources Office 
Seminole Tribe of Florida 
c.  
Jim Shore, Esq., General Counsel, Seminole Tribe of Florida 
 
Randy Singh, Executive Director of Operations, Seminole Tribe of Florida  
Stacy Myers, Acting Director, ERMD, Seminole Tribe of Florida  
Stephen A. Walker, Esq., Lewis, Longman & Walker  
Michelle Diffenderfer, Esq., Lewis, Longman & Walker 
Bernard Howard, HERO, Assistant Director 
Rachel Santana, Esq., Lewis, Longman and Walker 
Whitney Sapienza, ERMD, Assistant Director 
Jed Redwine, ERMD Ecologist 
 
 

 
 
 
Reference: 
Scheidt, D. J., P.I. Kalla, and D. Surratt. 2021. Everglades Regional Environmental Monitoring 
and Assessment Program - REMAP. Water quality and management, nutrients, mercury, soils 
and habitat. Monitoring for adaptive management: a phase IV update. EPA 904-R21-002. – 
available online at: https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-
11/scheidt_kalla_surratt_2021_usepa_everglades_remap_epa-904-r21-002-final.pdf

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0259 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
2550 University Ave Suite 212N │St. Paul, MN 55114 | 651.313.5800 | freshwater.org
 
Freshwater Society is a  
nonprofit organization 
working to inspire and 
empower people to 
value and preserve our 
freshwater resources. 
 
 
 
BOARD OF 
DIRECTORS 
 
Ryan Godfrey, PhD, 
Chair 
Josephine Marcotty, Vice 
Chair 
Dave Leuthe, Treasurer 
Wade Campbell, 
Secretary 
 
Risikat Adesaogun 
Jacques Finlay, PhD,    
Ex-Officio 
Ryan Hurt 
Tyler Johnson 
Jeremy Lenz 
Corey Lohmiller 
Jill Lucas 
Laura Pagano 
Doug Thomas 
Aaron Tinjum 
Renee Willette 
 
Emeritus Directors  
Todd Bolin 
Blyth Brookman 
JoEllen Hurr  
Tom Skramstad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 6, 2023 
 
Re:  Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights.” 87 Fed. 
Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022) Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791. 
 
To Whom It May Concern: 
Freshwater, a Minnesota nonprofit that strives to translate science into policy and action to 
preserve freshwater resources, is strongly in support of the proposed rule changes at 40 CFR part 
131 that elevate tribal reserved rights in water quality decision-making on, and upstream of, 
tribal reservations and ceded lands.  
At the same time, we see the need for more clarity in the proposed changes so that the tribes 
and states are made better aware of how these proposed changes will be implemented. In 
particular the rule should clarify the role of the EPA in resolving issues that may arise over 
differing state and tribal water-quality standards, especially where treaty areas span state 
boundaries. Does the proposed rule require states to consult with tribes, or will the EPA do that 
during its review of state standards?  
Minnesota and other states currently lack the expertise to understand the broad and varying 
implications of the different treaties that govern lands within their borders. The Minnesota 
Pollution Control Agency is the EPA designee in Minnesota and has had a “tribal consultation 
policy” for a decade,  identified contacts for each of the 11 Sovereign Nations within the state 
geography, but just one tribal liaison and no tribal law experts. So, even if leadership at the 
MPCA supports these proposed rule changes, they have limited capacity to translate the 
concepts of the rules into specific, actionable steps to ensure their equitable and timely 
application.  
What and how much must be known in order to protect tribal reserved rights? Historic inequities 
have contributed to the limited ability of tribal governments to establish independent water-
quality-monitoring networks and these proposed rule changes imply that tribal reserved rights 
only exist where the connections between the impairment and the resource can be 
demonstrated or already exist. Will the EPA or another federal agency provide support for tribes 
to study the connections and make these determinations possible? Does the EPA have the staff 
capacity to develop adequate, field-based, water-quality standards across this region?  
Tying the rules to Human Health Criteria is limiting and difficult to document. It is not always the 
case that the consumption of a resource will increase the cancer risk of a population. In some 
cases the degradation of water quality is just a slight increase in temperature, or a change in 
water quantity and the seasonality of flow, or something as difficult to pin down as a change in 
the cryptic sulfur cycle in the muds of lakes that support wild rice that negatively impacts the 
ability of a population to rely on a resource for sustenance. 

 
 
Tribal departments of natural resources have even greater staff-capacity challenges than state 
agencies, as Freshwater learned in a series of interviews conducted with 25 of the 35 tribal 
nations within EPA Region 5.  Lack of financial support for staffing and continuity of programs 
significantly impacts their ability to conduct the kinds of proactive monitoring activities required 
to demonstrate where and how waters are impaired, let alone document the subsequent effects 
on important cultural resources. Merely hoping that tribal DNR staff will have the capacity to 
participate in the Triennial Standards Review or some other ongoing EPA-mandated process will 
not make this scenario a reality. We strongly encourage increased and sustained federal funding 
to support tribal water-quality-monitoring positions and programs that focus on tribal priority 
areas.  
However, data sovereignty remains important. There are sensitivities to identifying the specific 
location of foods or medicines of cultural significance. Will the data collected by the tribes or 
their designees remain sovereign? If so, will the states trust the designation if they are not privy 
to the supporting documentation?  
It is the Indigenous residents of the region who are not associated with federally recognized 
bands, and therefore have no chance of benefitting from Treatment as a State, that are the most 
vulnerable to the impacts of degraded water quality in ceded territory. For example, members of 
the Sandy Lake Band of Minnesota Chippewa rely on wild rice and fish, some consuming them 
daily, and have seen significant declines in the amount or rice available for harvest and are 
warned of mercury contamination of fish. How will these proposed rule changes improve access 
to foods and medicines for the most underrepresented yet some of the earliest residents of the 
region? Proposed baseline, water-quality standards will help but will they be based on adequate 
local knowledge?  
In closing, Freshwater requests that this letter be entered into the official record for the 
proposed rule at 40 CFR part 131. We are willing to meet regarding the findings of the interviews 
conducted with the tribal governments in EPA Region 5 and ongoing work to address the science 
capacity challenges facing tribal DNRs.  
Respectfully,  
 
Carrie E. Jennings, PhD 
Research and Policy Director, Freshwater

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0175 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Department of  
Environmental Conservation  
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER 
PO BOX 111800 
Juneau, Alaska 99811-1800 
Office:  907-465-5065 
Fax: 907-465-5070 
February 22, 2023 
 
 
Ms. Jennifer Brundage  
Office of Water, Standards and Health Protection Division 
Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Subject:   Extension of Public Comment Period – Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions 
to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
 
The Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) requests a 90-day extension of the comment 
deadline for the EPA’s proposed rulemaking. There has not been adequate time for state agencies, 
stakeholders, and the general public to evaluate this extensive, technical document, review the numerous cited 
references to case law, fully evaluate the applicability of potential reserved rights that might exist, and 
formulate informed comments while also attempting to address numerous other EPA rulemakings. 
 
This is especially true for the State of Alaska because there are many legal questions, unanswered by EPA, 
about how this proposed rule would implicate existing federal law, specifically the Alaska Native Claims 
Settlement Act (ANCSA) and the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (ANILCA). Rather than 
setting aside reservations, these statutes created twelve private regional corporations and over 200 private 
village corporations to be owned by enrolled Alaska Native shareholders. The federal government recognizes 
574 Indian tribes in the contiguous United States and Alaska. Of those, 227 tribes are located in Alaska - 40 
percent of all federally recognized tribes nationwide. Yet the proposed rulemaking does not mention the State 
of Alaska or the relationship of ANCSA and ANILCA to the concept of tribal reserved rights. Additional time 
is needed to dialogue with EPA about what reserved rights might be recognized in Alaska given these state-
specific federal laws. This dialogue is a prerequisite to the State’s ability to provide meaningful comment on 
the proposed rule. 
 
Given the potential far-reaching consequences of the proposed rulemaking, we respectfully request that EPA 
extend the comment period by 90 days. The State of Alaska and members of the public deserves ample time 
and opportunity to evaluate the proposed rulemaking and to consider and respond to the issues raised. Thank 
you for your consideration of this request. If you have any questions or concerns, please do not hesitate to 
contact Gary Mendivil by email at gary.mendivil@alaska.gov or by phone at (907) 465-5061. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
Jason W. Brune 
Commissioner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cc:  
Emma Pokon, DEC 
 
Randy Bates, DEC 
 
Julie Pack, LAW

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0241 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
1 
 
March 6, 2023 
 
The Honorable Radhika Fox  
Assistant Administrator  
Office of Water  
Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW  
Washington, DC 20460  
 
 
Re: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions To Protect Tribal Reserved Rights/EPA-HQ-
OW-2021-0791; FRL-8599-01-OW 
 
Dear Assistant Administrator Fox: 
 
This Coalition consists of national trade associations from sectors across the economy, including 
agriculture, construction, energy, manufacturing, mining, and the broad business community. 
Coalition members would be directly affected by the proposed rulemaking through changes to 
the water quality standards program and associated state and tribal treatment as a state (TAS) 
programs that are likely to result in widespread impairment designations and changes to 
discharge permit conditions. The Coalition supports sustainable regulation to uphold our shared 
environmental, social, and economic priorities. The Coalition also supports efforts to promote 
tribal self-determination; however, the proposed rule is not sustainable or implementable, and if 
finalized as proposed, it will not create the human health or water quality outcomes that the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA or the Agency) desires.  
 
The proposed rule would displace state and TAS tribal authority and discretion to manage water 
resources and make risk management decisions and authorize EPA to dictate how states and TAS 
tribes manage resources. The proposed rule would require states, TAS tribes, and EPA to protect 
broadly defined “tribal reserved rights” through the Clean Water Act (CWA or the Act) water 
quality standards program. This proposal represents a material agency overreach, and it would 
have significant and demonstrable detrimental effects on largely state- and TAS tribe-
administered water quality standards programs and entities regulated by those programs. The 
CWA does not provide EPA the authority to promulgate this rule, and neither states, TAS tribes, 
nor EPA would be equipped to interpret tribal treaties or other instruments that may grant 
reserved rights to sovereign tribes. Additionally, EPA has not done the minimum analysis that is 
required to assess this policy proposal’s costs and implications.  
 
More broadly, EPA proposes to create an entirely new structure for developing and 
implementing water quality standards without any evidence that existing water quality standards 
are not protective. As required by the CWA, existing water quality standards programs require 
that designated uses be protected and are subject to public input and EPA oversight. In the 
proposal, EPA has not provided any information or data to suggest that existing water quality 
standards are insufficient to protect tribal uses.    
 

 
2 
 
As demonstrated below, the business community favors policies that promote tribal self-
determination and human health, environmental, and economic well-being. However, EPA has 
failed to provide an adequate rationale or explanation for the proposal, has failed to consider 
important aspects of the legal, governance, and water quality challenges facing states and TAS 
tribes, and has proposed a rule that exceeds its statutory authority and is not in accordance with 
the law. The Coalition respectfully requests that EPA withdraw this proposal and conduct 
legitimate and appropriate engagement with states, TAS tribes, regulated entities, and the 
interagency community with expertise in tribal law and policy issues to better understand the 
relevant concerns and develop a workable path forward. There are options that are less costly for 
all stakeholders. 
 
I. 
The existing CWA framework and programs are robust and more than 
adequate to protect water quality and tribal uses 
 
The CWA is based on a federal-state partnership, known as “a program of cooperative 
federalism.” PUD No. 1 of Jefferson Cnty. v. Wash. Dept. of Ecology, 511 U.S. 700, 703-04 
(1994); City of Abilene v. U.S. E.P.A., 325 F.3d 657, 659 (5th Cir. 2003) (quoting Arkansas v. 
Oklahoma, 503 U.S. 91, 101 (1992)); New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144, 167 (1992). 
Under this framework, states and TAS tribes are primarily responsible for implementing much of 
the statute, and EPA retains an oversight role to ensure that state actions comply with the CWA. 
33 U.S.C. § 1251(b) (“It is the policy of Congress to recognize, preserve, and protect the primary 
responsibilities and right of States to prevent, reduce, and eliminate pollution.”) 
 
The CWA explicitly assigns to the states the primary authority for adopting water quality 
standards. 33 U.S.C. § 1313(a), (c). State water quality standards must protect designated uses 
and “must be based on sound scientific rationale.” 40 C.F.R. §131.11(a). “In designating uses of 
a water body and the appropriate criteria for those uses, the State shall take into consideration the 
water quality standards of downstream waters and shall ensure that its water quality standards 
provide for the attainment and maintenance of the water quality standards of downstream 
waters.” 40 C.F.R. §131.10(b). When establishing numeric water quality criteria, states are 
encouraged to rely on recommendations adopted by EPA pursuant to CWA section 304(a); 
EPA’s 304(a) recommendations, as modified to reflect site-specific conditions; or other 
scientifically defensible methods. 40 C.F.R. § 131.11(b).  
 
State water quality standards adopted pursuant to the CWA must be reviewed by EPA for 
consistency with the CWA. Federal regulations set out specific elements that state submittals 
must include and the factors EPA must consider as it reviews state standards. 40 C.F.R. §§ 131.6, 
131.5(a). After review, EPA may either approve or disapprove the standards. 33 U.S.C. § 
1313(c)(2)(A); 40 C.F.R. § 131.5(a). If EPA determines that the standards are consistent with the 
factors in 40 C.F.R. § 131.5(a), EPA must, within 60 days of the date of submission, approve the 
standards. 33 U.S.C. §1313(c)(3); 40 C.F.R. § 131.5(b). If EPA concludes that the state’s 
standards are not consistent with federal regulations, then EPA has 90 days in which to notify the 
state and specify the changes necessary to meet the CWA’s requirements. Id. If the state fails to 
adopt the changes within 90 days of notification by the EPA, then EPA must promulgate a water 
quality standard for the state. 33 U.S.C. §§ 1313(c)(3)-(4). 
 

 
3 
 
In 1987, Congress amended the CWA to allow tribes to obtain TAS authority and administer and 
enforce tribal programs under the CWA. 33 U.S.C. §1377(e). In 1991, EPA updated its 
regulations to include standards and procedures for tribes to obtain TAS. 56 Fed. Reg. 64876 
(Dec. 12, 1991). And in 1994, EPA updated its regulations to streamline the TAS program and 
make it less burdensome for tribes to seek TAS status. 59 Fed. Reg. 64343 (Dec. 14, 1994). The 
TAS authority puts a tribe on the same footing as a state, with the ability to establish water 
quality standards, designate uses in accordance with tribal policy and culture, and issue discharge 
permits with limits protective of those standards and uses. See 33 U.S.C. §1377(e), 40 C.F.R. 
§131.8.   
 
The CWA and EPA’s existing regulations provide a robust water quality standards program, 
including significant and meaningful opportunities for states and TAS tribes to protect waters 
based on state and tribal uses, policies, and priorities. The proposed rule would upend the 
cooperative federalism foundation of the CWA and would strip states and TAS tribes of their 
ability to establish designated uses, make risk-based resource management decisions, and 
promulgate water quality standards that are based on sound science. Indeed, the proposed rule 
would unlawfully hinder states and TAS tribes’ exercise of their fundamental authorities as 
sovereigns and as primary regulators under the CWA.  
 
II. 
The CWA does not authorize the proposed rule 
 
The proposed rule would require states and TAS tribes to protect reserved tribal rights when 
establishing CWA water quality standards. The proposed rule states that the CWA authorizes this 
proposal; however, EPA has not pointed to any specific provision in the statute that authorizes it 
to require that states adopt certain designated uses, interpret treaties or other agreements between 
sovereigns, or translate reserved rights into water quality standards. In the proposal’s preamble, 
EPA spends three pages (out of 19) weaving together various court decisions that address 
interpretations of specific treaties, describing provisions of the CWA and how those programs 
work, and then cites to a single reference in the CWA to the word “treaty.” None of the cited 
court decisions, CWA programs, or statutory provisions authorize EPA to take the action it has 
proposed. 
 
a. EPA’s cited statutory authorities do not support the proposed rule 
 
The Agency relies on CWA section 501, which grants EPA authority to make “such regulations 
as are necessary to carry out” the Act.  But this general grant of rulemaking authority does not 
authorize EPA to overlook the text of other CWA provisions or seek to expand its authority 
under the guise of authorities found outside of the CWA.   
 
The proposed rule quotes only one provision from the CWA concerning treaties: “This Act shall 
not be construed as… affecting or impairing the provisions of any treaty of the United States.” 
CWA section 511(a), 33 U.S.C. § 1371(a). On its face, this provision obligates the federal 
government not to affect and not to impair the provisions of any treaty with any sovereign 
(including, but not limited to, tribes). But EPA improperly interprets this clause as congressional 
approval to expand EPA’s authority whenever the CWA intersects with “any treaty of the United 
States.” This provision does not compel EPA to take any particular action; rather, it serves as a 

 
4 
 
limit on actions that EPA is authorized to carry out under the Act. In other words, this discrete 
provision does not create an affirmative responsibility for EPA or any other federal or state 
agency to manage water resources for the benefit, the best interest, or the needs of parties to 
treaties with the United States.  
 
If Congress intended for states and EPA to protect tribal reserved rights through the CWA or for 
EPA to have any role at all in interpreting reserved rights, it would have said so. Section 511(a) 
simply lacks the force EPA has attempted to give it in order to support its atextual interpretation 
of section 303(c).   
 
Similarly, EPA cannot draw authority to limit state discretion (and expand its own authority) 
from tribal treaties themselves. Treaties between the United States and tribes are not grants of 
authority to EPA, and EPA points to no treaty or set of treaties that would grant EPA the 
authority it claims. As a general matter, we are aware of no tribal reserved rights that EPA could 
rely on to expand its CWA authority or to require a state or TAS tribe to designate a particular 
use for its waters or to set standards in line with EPA’s proposed rule. Tribal reserved rights 
similarly do not limit or prohibit a state, TAS tribe, or EPA from taking an otherwise lawful 
action under the CWA, and EPA has failed to explain why it is authorized and compelled to 
promulgate additional requirements based on such reserved rights.   
 
b. The proposal would impermissibly restrict state and TAS tribe authority to 
set designated uses 
 
The proposed rule would unlawfully mandate states and TAS tribes to adopt specific designated 
uses. As described above, the CWA requires states and TAS tribes to adopt water quality 
standards which “shall consist of the designated uses of the navigable waters involved and the 
water quality criteria for such waters based upon such uses.” 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(2)(A). Water 
quality standards “shall be such as to protect the public health or welfare, enhance the quality of 
water and serve the purposes of this chapter.” Id. In establishing the standards, states and TAS 
tribes are required to consider the standards’ “use and value for public water supplies, 
propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, and agricultural, industrial, and other 
purposes, and . . . their use and value for navigation.” Id. Beyond that, states and TAS tribes are 
provided discretion under the statute to establish uses appropriate for their waters, and then 
protect those uses through water quality standards.  
 
EPA’s existing regulations and guidance implement these statutory provisions. Specifically, 40 
C.F.R. § 131.10(a) provides, “Each State must specify appropriate water uses to be achieved and 
protected.” EPA guidance materials underscore the state and TAS tribe role in establishing 
designated uses. See e.g., Water Quality Standards Key Concepts, Module 2: Use (“Designated 
uses are incorporated into State/Tribal law. They are used to determine water quality criteria, 
which serve as the basis for discharge permit limits. . . . ‘Designated uses’ (defined in 40 C.F.R. 
§ 131.3(e)) are uses specified by a State or Tribe in its water quality standards regulations for 
each water body or segment, regardless of whether the uses are currently being attained. These 
uses describe the State/Tribe's management objectives and expectations for its waters and allow 
the State/Tribe to work with its stakeholders to identify the collective goal.”).1  
 
1 Available at https://www.epa.gov/wqs-tech/key-concepts-module-2-use. 

 
5 
 
 
Contrary to the statutory, regulatory, and guidance materials quoted above, the proposed rule 
would remove the ability for states and TAS tribes to establish uses to be achieved and protected. 
In place of states and TAS tribes, EPA would require “tribal reserved right” designated uses be 
established over any water or land where such reserved rights may apply. Mandating a tribal 
reserved right designated use would almost certainly preclude a state or TAS tribe from 
designating other CWA-authorized uses in those areas, such as agricultural or industrial. EPA 
has not identified any legal authority allowing it to mandate or prohibit the adoption of certain 
designated uses and the proposal is not in accordance with the law.  
 
Indeed, the CWA grants states and TAS tribes’ broad authority to set designated uses as part of 
the CWA’s carefully struck balance between the federal government and the states. Courts have 
recognized that the CWA does not necessarily grant states this authority but rather preserves 
existing state authority.  See, e.g., Miss. Comm’n on Nat. Res. v. Costle, 625 F.2d 1269, 1276 
(5th Cir. 1980) (“[T]he specification of a waterway as one for fishing, swimming, or public water 
supply is closely tied to the zoning power Congress wanted left to the states.”); see also  33 
U.S.C. § 1251(b) (“It is the policy of Congress to recognize, preserve, and protect the primary 
responsibilities and rights of States to prevent, reduce, and eliminate pollution, to plan the 
development and use (including restoration, preservation, and enhancement) of land and water 
resources, and to consult with the Administrator in the exercise of his authority under this 
chapter.”).  EPA’s proposed rule would deprive states of this authority specifically preserved by 
the CWA and would dramatically reduce state discretion to set designated uses in instances 
where a tribal reserved right may be implicated.  To be sure, states and TAS tribes may adopt 
designated uses that protect higher levels of fish consumption, for example, so long as they are 
grounded in a factual record, based on a “sound scientific rationale,” 40 CFR §§ 131.5(a)(2) & 
131.119(a)(1), and “scientifically defensible methods,” id. 131.11(b)(iii).  But EPA lacks the 
authority to compel these outcomes by rule.   
 
c. EPA lacks legal authority to interpret the scope and effect of tribal treaties 
 
The proposed rule would also require states, TAS tribes, and EPA to interpret agreements 
between the federal government and tribes and incorporate them into CWA decision making. See 
e.g., proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.5(a)(9) (requiring EPA to determine “[w]hether water quality 
standards protect tribal reserved rights. . . .”). Notably, the proposed definition of “tribal treaty 
rights” includes those held “either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive 
orders, or other sources of Federal law.” The proposed rule does not explain what “other sources 
of federal law” could apply or be incorporated into the CWA or the water quality standards 
program. Regardless, neither the CWA nor any other act of Congress has authorized EPA to 
undertake or assign to states and TAS tribes these new responsibilities. The proposal therefore 
exceeds EPA’s statutory authority.  
 
To the extent that EPA’s interpretations of the statutes it administers may receive deference in 
certain circumstances pursuant to Chevron U.S.A. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, 467 
U.S. 837 (1984), a precondition to any such deference is a congressional delegation of 
administrative authority. See Adams Fruit Co., Inc. v. Barrett, 494 U.S. 638, 649-50 (1990). EPA 
has not been delegated the authority to interpret tribal treaties or other instruments, and EPA’s 

 
6 
 
interpretations under the proposed rule would not be entitled to any deference. See Maine v. 
Johnson, 498 F.3d 37, 45 (1st Cir. 2007). The federal courts have sole jurisdiction over questions 
of treaty-guaranteed rights. See 28 U.S.C. § 1362; Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of 
Flathead Reservation, Montana v. Flathead Irr. & Power Project, 16 F. Supp. 1292, 1295 (D. 
Mont. 1985).  
 
d. EPA lacks expertise to interpret the scope and effect of tribal treaties 
 
In addition to its lack of legal authority, EPA fundamentally lacks the expertise or the competency to 
interpret treaties or other agreements between sovereigns. There is a significant and extremely 
complex body of law that would inform the interpretation of treaties and other instruments, such that 
even federal courts struggle with these interpretations. The reality is that EPA as an agency, even 
with its extraordinarily talented and dedicated staff, is not equipped to interpret tribal reserved rights 
or to establish state obligations to protect those rights.  
 
EPA’s lack of expertise in this field is evident in its proposal. Indeed, EPA repeatedly directs its 
own staff to rely on rights holders to delineate the scope and effect of the reserved rights at issue. 
And EPA suggests that states preparing standards should do the same: “EPA encourages ongoing 
communication between states and right holders to help states ascertain where reserved rights 
apply and what data are available to inform the level of water quality necessary to protect those 
rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. 74368. This approach seems to delegate substantial responsibility for 
interpreting the scope and nature of the reserved right to the right holder, which would then be 
used by EPA to determine whether a state- or TAS tribe-issued standard complies with the Act’s 
requirements. This approach turns section 303(c) on its ear.   
 
If finalized, the proposed rule would be a significant federal overreach that infringes on the 
authority and discretion of sovereign states and TAS tribes. The CWA does not authorize EPA to 
promulgate this rule, and EPA would not have the expertise to administer it.  
 
e. EPA’s proposal lacks foundation and is replete with unsupported 
assumptions 
 
EPA posits that it has an affirmative duty, indeed an “obligation[,] to ensure that its actions are 
consistent with treaties, statutes, executive orders, and other sources of Federal law reflecting 
tribal reserved rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. 74364. But the proposal provides no support for the 
proposition that Congress intended for states or EPA to search far and wide for all sources of 
federal law that may potentially implicate tribal reserved rights in order to discharge its routine 
obligations under the CWA. Indeed, tribal reserved rights do not limit or prohibit a state or EPA 
from taking an otherwise lawful action under the CWA, and EPA has failed to explain why it is 
authorized or compelled to promulgate additional CWA requirements limiting state discretion 
based on such reserved rights.  See Letter from Dennis Deziel, Regional Administrator, EPA 
Region 1, to Gerald Reid, Commissioner, Maine Department of Environmental Protection, 
Withdrawal of Certain of EPA’s February 2, 2015 Decisions Concerning Water Quality 
Standards for Waters in Indian Land, Attachment A at 10, Attachment B, at 12 (May 27, 2020) 
(“[T]he Settlement Acts do not expand EPA’s CWA authority, nor do they require Maine to 
designate a general fishing use with a sustenance component or EPA to recharacterize a 

 
7 
 
designated use to mean sustenance fishing. The Settlement Acts similarly do not limit or prohibit 
EPA from taking an otherwise lawful action under the CWA, such as approval of Maine’s 
fishing designated use that does not mean sustenance fishing.”).   
 
EPA then suggests as a general matter that “tribal reserved rights encompass subsidiary rights 
that are not explicitly addressed in treaty or statutory language but are necessary to render those 
rights meaningful.” 87 Fed. Reg. 74364. But EPA’s assertion that water quality—or, more 
precisely, a certain level of water quality as identified by EPA—is one such “subsidiary right” 
lacks support.  First, EPA admits that such subsidiary rights are atextual and derived through 
EPA’s interpretations of a small subset of tribal reserved rights—interpretations that EPA is 
neither expressly authorized nor well-equipped to perform.  Second, EPA’s analysis is based on a 
select handful of tribal reserved rights. At no point in EPA’s proposal does the Agency explain 
why these particular examples are representative of tribal reserved rights nationwide or should 
form the factual basis for EPA’s proposed rule. Third, the case law on which EPA relies does not 
relate to water quality or achieving a certain contaminant level in the aquatic resources. Rather, 
these precedents turn on access—either of tribal members to a hunting or fishing area or of 
aquatic resources to the surface water body subject to the reserved treaty right.  87 Fed. Reg. at 
74364 fn. 26, fn.27. It is a significant leap from interpreting such rights to include a subsidiary 
right of access to interpreting such rights to include a subsidiary right to a specific level of water 
quality for tens or hundreds of different pollutants. EPA’s only support for its position that tribal 
reserved rights implicate water quality at all is a letter sent to EPA from the DOI solicitor eight 
years ago pertaining to a specific set of tribal treaties in one state.  Id. at 74364 fn. 28. And even 
this letter couches the rights at issue as “some subsidiary rights to water quality”—a far cry from 
EPA’s proposed approach that would reduce the discretion of states and TAS tribes and would 
require specific designated uses and vastly more stringent water quality standards nationwide.2   
 
EPA reached vastly different conclusions in its actions within the last five years approving state 
water quality standards in Washington, Idaho, and Maine.  87 Fed. Reg. at 74366 fn. 42, fn. 43; 
87 Fed. Reg. at 74369 fn. 57 (citing EPA decisions). EPA may of course reconsider previously 
held positions or interpretations, but it must do so knowingly and specifically, while considering 
all relevant aspects of the problem. Yet, in its proposal, EPA notes only in passing that it has 
reconsidered a small handful of specific “assertions” or “statements” in those prior decisions.  87 
Fed. Reg. at 74366 & 74370. Although much of EPA’s proposal contradicts elements of these 
prior decisions, EPA did not adequately acknowledge each issue on which it has changed 
position from those prior decisions for Washington, Idaho, and Maine, and it has not explained 
with specificity why its new interpretations are permissible under the CWA and why it believes 
its new interpretations to be “better.”  FCC v. Fox Television Stations, 556 U.S. 502, 515 (2009). 
 
 
2 EPA also fails to consider another relevant letter from DOI to EPA.  Letter from Daniel H. Jorjani, Principal 
Deputy Solicitor, to Matthew Z. Leopold, General Counsel, Re: Maine’s WQS and Tribal Fishing Rights of Maine’s 
Tribes (April 27, 2018).  As EPA described in its 2020 final action in Maine, in its 2018 letter, “DOI does not opine 
that EPA must take action beyond what it is statutorily authorized to do under the CWA as a result of such fishing 
rights.”  U.S. EPA, Response to Comments on EPA’s Proposal to Revise EPA’s 2015 Decisions on Sustenance 
Fishing Designated Use and Human Health Criteria in Maine at 21 (May 27, 2020) (“DOI’s letter did not mention 
that EPA must take any specific action under the CWA in light of any Tribal fishing rights.”).     

 
8 
 
III. 
The proposal is arbitrary and capricious because it undermines the cooperative 
federalism framework of the CWA and because EPA has failed to consider the 
harmful effects that would occur if the proposal were made final 
 
The proposed rule would affect every aspect of the CWA regulatory programs and unlawfully 
interfere with fundamental state and TAS tribal authorities to manage their resources. The 
proposal’s preamble also downplays the novel nature and potential reach of the proposed rule 
and fails to address implementation in any meaningful way. EPA has not considered these 
important aspects of the problem, making the proposal arbitrary and capricious. 
 
a. EPA’s requirement to incorporate heritage FCRs and highly protective risk 
levels has no basis in the CWA 
 
The proposal would require states and TAS tribes to incorporate historic and pre-settlement fish 
consumption rates into EPA’s human health criteria (HHC) equation, which would drive the 
stringency of the resulting water quality standards by orders of magnitude compared to current 
fish consumption rates and EPA’s recognized national average. Similarly, the proposal would 
require states and TAS tribes to apply the same cancer risk rate to small tribal subpopulations as 
is applied to the general population, further driving stringency by orders of magnitude. These 
proposed changes are not supported by the CWA and are based on assumptions lacking adequate 
factual, scientific, and practical support. The proposed rule is arbitrary and capricious and 
unlawful under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA)and should be abandoned.  
 
The CWA gives states and TAS tribes broad discretion to set water quality standards. The Act 
prescribes that such standards, which include designated uses and water quality criteria to protect 
those uses, “shall be such as to protect the public health or welfare, enhance the quality of water 
and serve the purposes of this chapter,” and “shall be established taking into consideration their 
use and value for public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, 
and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and also taking into consideration their use and 
value for navigation.”  33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(2)(A).  The Act does not prescribe precisely how a 
state or TAS tribe must weigh each factor, so long as the resulting standards are protective.  Yet 
EPA’s proposal would cabin the discretion that the Act affords to states and TAS tribes, without 
any authority for doing so.   
 
By requiring states and TAS tribes not only to consider but also to adopt unsuppressed fish 
consumption rates and unduly stringent risk levels, EPA’s proposed rule would afford the 
Agency increased authority to disapprove and replace state and TAS tribal water quality 
standards that are entirely lawful and consistent with CWA section 303(c). Moreover, this is not 
an area where EPA can claim deference for its interpretation, because Congress has spoken 
directly to the question of the breadth of State authority to set designated uses and criteria.  
Chevron, U.S.A. v. Nat. Res. Def. Council, 467 U.S. 837, 842 (1984) (“First, always, is the 
question whether Congress has directly spoken to the precise question at issue. If the intent of 
Congress is clear, that is the end of the matter; for the court, as well as the agency, must give 
effect to the unambiguously expressed intent of Congress”).  EPA’s attempt to cabin that clear 
discretion afforded by Congress should be accorded no deference.   
 

 
9 
 
EPA provides only a limited basis for why states must employ a fish consumption rate (or rate of 
consumption for other aquatic resources) based on an estimate of “unsuppressed” consumption 
instead of on actual, real-world consumption data or observations. Indeed, as noted in the 
proposal, EPA just four years ago in its 2019 approval of Idaho’s water quality standards stated 
that “[n]othing in the CWA or the EPA’s regulations and guidance, including the 2000 
Methodology, requires a state to set a FCR based on an estimate of unsuppressed consumption.”  
EPA’s Approval of Idaho’s New and Revised Human Health Water Quality Criteria for Toxics 
and Other Water Quality Standards Provisions at 12 (Apr. 4, 2019).  EPA’s proposal provides no 
detailed or persuasive rationale for departing from this interpretation, and it does not identify any 
provisions of the CWA that require states to employ a counterfactual estimate of “unsuppressed” 
consumption.   
 
EPA’s only statutory support for limiting the discretion afforded to states and TAS tribes in 
section 303(c) is the overarching goals section of the statute in CWA section 101(a).  33 U.S.C. 
§ 1251(a).  But a statutory goals section is neither a grant of additional authority to EPA nor is it 
a license to an agency to impose additional requirements on states in contravention of other 
statutory text. EPA’s reliance on it here is misplaced. Even if EPA could look to the Act’s goals 
section to inform its interpretation of section 303(c), EPA has identified no ambiguous text in 
section 303(c) that requires interpretation through the lens of section 101(a). Furthermore, simply 
the proposition that one of the Act’s goals is to “restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and 
biological integrity of the Nation’s waters” does not mean that EPA has authority to compel 
states or TAS tribes to “restore” all waters to pre-settlement uses and conditions. EPA erred by 
not considering the goals in section 101(a) in the context of the stated policy of Congress in the 
next subsection of the Act, which emphasizes the important roles that states play under the CWA 
framework and that such state authority predates the CWA and thus was “preserved.”  33 U.S.C. 
§ 1251(b) (“It is the policy of Congress to recognize, preserve, and protect the primary 
responsibilities and right of States to prevent, reduce, and eliminate pollution.”). 
 
EPA’s proposed requirement for states and TAS tribes to employ an estimate of “unsuppressed” 
consumption instead of actual, real-world consumption data or observations contravenes the 
CWA’s statutory directive to states to promulgate standards that take into account “their use and 
value for” various enumerated factors. At no point does the Act either compel states to consider 
historical, prior uses (uses that may have been relevant decades if not centuries in the past) or 
direct states to prioritize historical uses over current or reasonably anticipated future uses. 
Likewise, the Act does not compel states to define reasonably anticipated future uses by 
employing estimates of historical or “heritage” use patterns. What’s more, EPA’s requirement of 
what counts as “unsuppressed” consumption is so ill-defined as to be almost certain to yield 
arbitrary outcomes.  It also provides states and TAS tribes with inadequate information for what 
EPA will require upon reviewing their standards.3  And EPA’s proposed mandate likely will lead 
to violations of EPA’s existing regulatory provision requiring that water quality standards must 
 
3 EPA further muddies the waters by stating that “the unsuppressed level should balance heritage use of a resource 
with what is currently reasonably achievable for a particular waterbody.”  87 FR 74369. But EPA provides limited 
guidance on what “balancing” means in this context.  In essence, EPA has proposed a formless, boundaryless 
standard that leaves EPA, and only EPA, as the ultimate arbiter of whether states and TAS tribes have properly 
divined an “unsuppressed” level of consumption.   

 
10 
 
be based on a “sound scientific rationale.” 40 CFR § 131.5(a)(2); id. § 131.119(a)(1). EPA’s 
proposal assumes, without evidence, that unsuppressed consumption rates for aquatic resources 
must be used because tribal members would return to subsistence levels of consumption but for 
“suppression” of these resources. But it is inconsistent with a sound scientific rationale to assume 
conditions such as subsistence levels of consumption that are neither reflective of the world as it 
is today nor grounded in a fact-based, reasonably foreseeable estimate of the future. 
 
EPA’s approach to mandating that states must use a risk rate to protect tribal members who may 
consume large amounts of aquatic resources “to at least the same risk level as provided to the 
general population of the state” is not rooted in the CWA and lacks a record foundation. The 
CWA provides no support for mandating treatment of high-consuming subpopulations as the 
target population for setting or revising water quality standards, particularly when the existing 
standards meet the statutory standard of “protect[ing] the public health or welfare” and 
“enhanc[ing] the quality of water.” The prospect of tribal reserved rights does not endow EPA 
with additional statutory authority to restrict state or TAS tribe discretion to set lawful standards 
under the CWA.   
 
The Agency also assumes without any analysis that tribal reserved rights to aquatic resources 
across the country compel states and TAS tribes to take this approach to setting a risk rate. The 
rulemaking record lacks adequate analysis from EPA substantiating why such rights are 
sufficiently similar such that all states must take this approach.   
 
To the extent EPA’s proposal is based on the proposition that a tribe’s status as a sovereign 
demands that a tribal subpopulation be protected to the same degree as the general population, 
this is not a scientific, technical, or public health based determination and, contrary to its 
obligations under the APA, EPA has not provided any technical support for the proposed 
mandate. EPA has also not explained why the CWA would demand that tribal subpopulations be 
protected to a greater degree than other high consuming subpopulations besides general allusions 
to the “unique” status of tribes and their “unique” relationship with the environment. Under this 
approach, EPA could determine that any high-consuming subpopulation was sufficiently 
“unique” to warrant mandatory treatment as the target population. Such an approach would be 
unmoored from the CWA, EPA’s existing regulations, and the 2000 Methodology. 
 
b. EPA has not considered the effects of the proposed rule, including 
unreasonably and unnecessarily stringent water quality standards   
 
EPA has not recognized, much less considered the effect that its proposed regulatory changes 
would have on water quality standards, the ability of states and TAS tribes to set, achieve or 
maintain such stringent standards, the thousands of regulated entities that could be affected, or 
the regulatory and economic impacts of designating vast new areas of the country as having 
impaired waters. These changes may also lead to the inability to permit discharges associated 
with important economic and social development. Finally, EPA has not provided any technical 
or scientific support for the proposed mandates. The proposed rule is therefore arbitrary and 
capricious and unlawful under the APA.  
 

 
11 
 
Since 2015, EPA has recommended that HHC water quality standards incorporate a fish 
consumption rate of 22 grams per day (g/day) where local data is not available. EPA Human 
Health Ambient Water Quality Criteria (2015). By contrast, the heritage consumption rate 
studies EPA included in the docket for this rulemaking range from 62 g/day to 1,646 g/day. 
Increasing the fish consumption rate in EPA’s HHC equation has a direct and linear effect of 
increasing the stringency of the resulting HHC. Assuming populations consume hundreds or 
thousands of grams of fish per day increases the stringency of the resulting HHC water quality 
standards by orders of magnitude. Also, requiring that water quality standards be calculated 
based on a single fish consumption rate that does not account for both the general population and 
high-consuming subgroups is not consistent with current risk protection science.  
 
Historically, states have had discretion to establish risk rates within a range that EPA and other 
federal agencies have determined to be protective of human health. The proposed rule would 
require states to apply the same risk rate to small tribal subpopulations as it applies to the general 
population. This is problematic because applying a particular risk rate to different population 
sizes changes the effective risk rate. For example, applying a 10-6 risk rate (meaning one 
additional person in a population of 1,000,000) to a population of 10,000 people would have an 
effective risk rate that is orders of magnitude more protective than 10-6. These extremely 
conservative risk rates are inconsistent with modern risk protection science. See Attachment: 
Summary of Health Risk Assessment Decisions in Environmental Regulations (Arcadis, 2022) 
(previously submitted to EPA with public comments on EPA’s Proposed Human Health Water 
Quality Criteria for the State of Washington (87 Fed. Reg. 19046 (April 1, 2022))).  
 
The proposed risk rate mandate would fundamentally change EPA’s longstanding policy 
allowing states and TAS tribes to make risk-management decisions, would be a substantial 
change in EPA’s longstanding risk recommendations, and would result in water quality standards 
that are orders of magnitude more stringent than would be required under existing regulations. 
The proposed rule would result in water quality standards that are more stringent than the natural 
background or even detection levels, and standards that cannot be met using cost-effective 
technologies. See Memorandum from National Council for Air and Stream Improvement 
(NCASI) to the American Forest & Paper Association, Technical Comments on EPA’s Proposed 
Rule: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, Docket 
No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 (Feb 28, 2023). Importantly, modern risk science indicates that 
these extremely conservative risk rates and the resulting standards are unlikely to actually reduce 
risk to exposed populations and EPA has not presented any information or data to indicate 
otherwise. The only rationale that EPA has provided for the new risk rate mandate is the “unique 
status as right holders” of tribal members. 87 Fed. Reg. 74730. To be clear, these proposed 
changes are not based on scientific, technical, or public health considerations and, contrary to its 
obligations under the APA, EPA has not provided appropriate explanation or technical support 
for the proposed mandate.  
 
Overly stringent risk levels that result in overly stringent water quality standards can also result 
in tremendous societal costs. At a minimum, EPA’s proposed changes would result in the vast 
majority of covered waters being deemed impaired under the proposed stringent standards. 
Beyond an impairment designation, states and TAS tribes would be required to develop and 
implement Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs) for likely hundreds of newly impaired waters. 

 
12 
 
Discharge permits under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) 
program would be required to include extremely conservative effluent limitations to ensure that 
dischargers did not cause or contribute to impairments.  
 
EPA admits that it did not consider any of these almost-certain effects of the proposed rule, as 
the APA requires.  See e.g., EA, 5 (“EPA did not estimate where or how tribal reserved rights 
will impact state WQS actions.”). EPA further admits that tribes in at least twelve states notified 
EPA that they plan to assert reserved rights, but EPA has not investigated the scope of the 
asserted reserved rights or how the proposed rule would affect CWA programs in these states.4 
There are likely many other states where reserved rights could be asserted under the proposed 
rule, underscoring the likely significant impacts the proposal would have across the country. 
EPA’s failure to identify, quantify, or consider these significant impacts from the proposal, and 
the agency’s failure to present any scientific or public health information to support or justify 
these changes, would render any final rule arbitrary and capricious, and therefore unlawful under 
the APA. 
 
c. EPA unreasonably downplays the magnitude of impacts the proposal would 
have on state and TAS tribal water management programs  
 
The agency has also failed to acknowledge or consider how the proposal would accelerate EPA’s 
ability to interfere with state and TAS tribal water and resource management programs, including 
water quantity and flow. The CWA explicitly reserves this role to the states, but the proposed 
rule would significantly undermine states’ rights to manage water and land use. EPA’s failure to 
consider these important aspects of the problem is arbitrary and capricious. In addition, as further 
explained below, EPA’s proposal would unlawfully “alter[] the federal-state framework by 
permitting federal encroachment upon a traditional state power,” even though Congress did not 
clearly authorize any such encroachment in the CWA.  Solid Waste Agency of N. Cook Cty. v. 
U.S. Army Corps of Engin’rs, 531 U.S. 159, 173 (2001) (SWANCC). 
 
Under the current water quality standards program, a state or TAS tribe could establish 
designated uses that specifically protect flow; however, those decisions would be made by the 
state or TAS tribe, not the federal government. Under the proposal, EPA would have the ability 
to disapprove state standards if EPA determines that the standards are not sufficiently protective 
of an asserted reserved right, including for a certain quantity or flow of water. This would put 
EPA in the position of choosing whose claim to water should be protected, undermining and 
interfering with the states’ longstanding role, not to mention negotiated and litigated claims to 
water rights.  
 
Disputes over water rights, flow, and volume have spanned generations and continue today. 
Indeed, the U.S. Supreme Court will hear oral arguments on March 20 in a case where the 
Navajo Nation has asserted a breach of trust claim against the United States for failing to secure 
an adequate supply of water for the Nation to farm its land. State of Arizona, et al., v. Navajo 
 
4 The EA states, “during pre-proposal tribal consultation, several tribes asserted in written comments that they have 
reserved rights to aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources in areas where states have WQS jurisdiction, including 
portions of the Great Lakes, Maine, Idaho, New York, Minnesota, Michigan, Wisconsin, Montana, Oregon, Idaho, 
Washington, Wyoming and Alaska.” EA, 5. 

 
13 
 
Nation, et al.; Department of Interior et al. v. Navajo Nation, et al. (Nos. 21-1484 and 22-51).  
The Navajo Nation’s claims are based on implied reserved rights, the same rights EPA’s 
proposal would require states, TAS tribes, and EPA to protect through the water quality 
standards program. In fact, EPA’s proposed rule preamble is substantively aligned with legal 
arguments and positions presented by the Navajo Nation, and is inconsistent with the Justice 
Department’s legal arguments and positions.5 This suggests that EPA has proposed a rule that is 
contrary to the federal government’s position concerning tribal reserved rights and that the 
Department of Justice may choose not to defend. The proposal does not acknowledge this 
pending Supreme Court case, nor does it explain how the proposed regulation might affect future 
water rights disputes between sovereigns.  
 
d. The proposal raises significant implementation questions  
 
The proposal’s preamble does not provide any context or guidance for how EPA expects the 
proposed rule would be implemented. For example, the proposed rule would require states to 
protect reserved tribal rights, but EPA admits that it does not know the geographic or substantive 
scope of those rights. While there are cases where the meaning and extent of certain reserved 
rights have been adjudicated and determined by a court of competent jurisdiction, these cases 
represent a slim minority. Most tribal claims to reserved rights have not been adjudicated, nor is 
their geographic or substantive extent established by legal precedent. In other words, EPA is 
mandating a requirement, the scope of which it has not ascertained or even attempted to 
ascertain.  This is not the hallmark of sound agency decision making and runs afoul of basic 
APA requirements. It is unclear how states, TAS tribes, or EPA will go about identifying the 
extent of such reserved rights or what resources are available for that purpose. It is also unclear 
how states and TAS tribes would translate reserved rights—including implied reserved rights and 
rights protecting the undefined “aquatic-dependent resources”—into achievable numeric water 
quality standards or meaningful narrative standards, or how these would be applied in other 
CWA programs such as the sections 401, 402, and 404 programs.  
 
What is clear is that states and TAS tribes will have significant challenges and burdens 
attempting to comply with any final rule. The proposal does not recognize, let alone address 
these significant burdens. For example, given the extremely broad definition of “tribal reserved 
rights,” even finding out what treaties or other agreements apply, and as importantly, what they 
mean, is a difficult and uncertain task. Many treaties have been specifically abrogated by 
Congress, others impliedly so. Some treaties thought long inapplicable have recently been given 
new force. See e.g., McGirt v. Oklahoma, 140 S. Ct. 2452 (2020). A recent decision of the U.S. 
District Court for the District of Minnesota illustrates the difficulty of ascertaining treaty rights: 
 
When interpreting Indian treaties, courts “give effect to the terms as the Indians 
themselves would have understood them.” Minnesota v. Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa 
 
5 The Department of Justice brief is available here: http://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/21/21-
1484/250399/20221219215422061_22-51%20Interior%20FINAL.pdf; the Navajo Nation’s brief is available here: 
http://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/21/21-
1484/253739/20230201172442801_State%20of%20Arizona%20v.%20Navajo%20Nation%20Merits%20Brief%20
FILE.pdf. 

 
14 
 
Indians, 526 U.S. 172, 196 (1999). “[T]he treaty must therefore be construed, not 
according to the technical meaning of its words to learned lawyers, but in the sense in 
which they would naturally be understood by the Indians.” Fishing Vessel, 443 U.S. at 
676 (quoting Jones v. Meehan, 175 U.S. 1, 11 (1899)). Interpreting a treaty thus requires 
“look[ing] beyond the written words to the larger context that frames the Treaty, 
including ‘the history of the treaty, the negotiations, and the practical construction 
adopted by the parties.’” Mille Lacs Band, 526 U.S. at 196 (quoting Choctaw Nation v. 
United States, 318 U.S. 423, 432 (1943)). Any ambiguous term must be “liberally 
construe[d] . . . in favor of tribal interests.” United States v. Gotchnik, 222 F.3d 506, 509 
(8th Cir. 2000). Treaties “are to be read with the tradition of Indian sovereignty in mind.” 
Sac & Fox Tribe of Miss in Iowa. v. Licklider, 576 F.2d 145, 150 (8th Cir. 1978). 
 
Order, Fond Du Lac Bank of Lake Superior Chippewas v. Cummins, Case No 0:22-cv-00170-
PJS-LIB, at 5 (D. Minn. Feb 24, 2023). EPA’s definition of “tribal reserved rights” also refers to 
Executive Orders.  While some reservations and tribes were recognized and lands set aside by 
Executive Order, there are many other Executive Orders purporting to recognize tribal rights, but 
not specifically referring to reservations.  EPA must at least identify which, or what kind, of 
Executive Orders would be necessary for a state to consider. 
 
The complexity of the implementation issues presented by the proposed rule would be multiplied 
based on the number of tribes that claim treaty rights in a state or TAS tribal territory and the 
number and extent of watersheds where these rights may apply. In states and TAS tribal territory 
with many tribes, the magnitude of the work could be extraordinary and could require resources 
that states and TAS tribes simply do not have. For example, there will be especially burdensome 
requirements in Alaska, where there are 228 federally recognized tribes. To implement the 
proposed rule, the State of Alaska could be required to consider and establish separate standards 
that reflect the reserved rights of each tribe. The proposed rule does not acknowledge, let alone 
consider these significant implementation challenges.  
 
Additionally, the proposal explains that when EPA reviews a state’s or TAS tribe’s water quality 
standard, it will consult with tribal right holders to evaluate whether the state or TAS tribe has 
properly identified and protected reserved rights. The proposal does not provide a timeline or 
standards for what this consultation would entail, the kinds of information EPA would gather, or 
whether a certain quality of information or data would be needed from the tribe to evaluate 
asserted reserved rights. Given the lack of objective standards and procedures, it is unclear how 
EPA could conduct these consultations and review and act on state water quality standards, all 
within the 60 or 90 days allotted in CWA section 303 and EPA’s regulations. See 33 U.S.C. § 
1313; 40 C.F.R. §131.21. EPA’s proposal is not consistent with the timeline for review required 
by Congress in the CWA. See generally Flint Ridge Development Co. v. Scenic Rivers Assn. of 
Okla., 426 U.S. 776, 788-89, 791 (1976) (holding that National Environmental Policy Act’s 
environmental impact statement (EIS) requirement did not apply to agency action that must be 
completed in 30 days, as requiring an EIS would create “a clear and fundamental conflict of 
statutory duty”) (“It is inconceivable that an environmental impact statement could, in 30 days, 
be drafted, circulated, commented upon, and then reviewed and revised in light of the 
comments.”); Jamul Action Comm. v. Chaudhuri, 837 F.3d 958, 965 (9th Cir. 2016) (“an agency 
cannot prepare an EIS in ninety days”). 

 
15 
 
 
Finally, it is unclear how water quality standards protecting reserved rights would be evaluated 
by EPA. All other water quality standards must be based on “sound scientific rationale” and 
“scientifically defensible methods.” 40 C.F.R. §§131.5(a)(2); 131.11(a)-(b). To date, the 
minimum federal standards under the CWA have been set by statute and regulation and are 
intended to be transparent so that states and TAS tribes can easily understand what is required of 
them, and how to establish compliant standards. Under the proposed rule, the minimum federal 
CWA standards would no longer be dictated by a CWA section 304(a) recommendation based on 
the best available science, or a 304(b) technology-based effluent limitation established after 
scientific study, as the CWA requires. Rather, the proposal would allow a new minimum 
standard to be established on a case-by-case basis after identifying and interpreting all applicable 
tribal reserved rights, a term that is defined unreasonably broadly in the proposal. Under the 
proposed rule, a new federal minimum standard could be established by an implied tribal 
reserved right that is memorialized in some unspecified form of federal law and that entirely 
lacks an objective standard or connection to the best available science.  
 
It is unclear how standards derived from an undefined historic “unsuppressed” reserved right, for 
example, would be evaluated against the regulatory requirements for water quality standards. 
What level of certainty or data quality must be demonstrated for a state to incorporate historic or 
unsuppressed expressions of reserved rights into water quality standards? How should a state or 
TAS tribe evaluate population growth and other variables distinct from water pollution that could 
affect the ability of historic uses to be supported across time? What level of deference would 
states get in their consideration of reserved rights and formulation of water quality standards? 
What level of information or evidence would be required to overrule a state’s assessment and 
protection of reserved rights?  
 
EPA has also not explained whether general or individual discharge permits issued under the 
NPDES program would receive a different level of review if the discharger is located in or near 
an area subject to tribal reserved rights. For example, would EPA review effluent limits to ensure 
they are protective of reserved rights? Would compliance schedules or variances be considered 
under a different standard of review if the permittee is located in or near a reserved rights area? 
 
EPA’s failure to consider or address these basic questions runs afoul of the agency’s obligations 
under the APA.  
 
e. The proposal would have serious and indefensible federalism implications 
 
The proposal preamble states, “EPA has concluded that this action does not have federalism 
implications. It will not have substantial direct effects on the states, on the relationship between 
the national government and the states, or on the distribution of power and responsibilities 
among the various levels of government.” 87 Fed. Reg. 74375. For all of the reasons described in 
detail above, this proposed conclusion is deeply flawed and EPA’s failure to consider the 
significant federalism implications of the proposal render the proposal arbitrary and capricious 
and not in accordance with law.  
  

 
16 
 
If finalized, the proposed rule would completely upend the carefully crafted and comprehensive 
cooperative federalism framework of the CWA. EPA attempts to downplay the potential impacts 
on states and TAS tribes by assuming that, in cases where reserved rights may expand across 
multiple jurisdictions, states and tribal interests would be aligned. This assumption is 
unreasonable and therefore arbitrary, just as it would be unreasonable to assume that any two 
states in the same geographic area would be aligned on matters of economic, environmental, or 
foreign policy.6 Even setting aside the strong likelihood that sovereigns will not infrequently 
have differing views on major policies, the proposal would require both sovereigns to submit to 
EPA for adjudication of disputes over potentially serious environmental, human health, risk 
management, and economic policy decisions. The proposal plainly has very significant 
federalism implications, and EPA’s contrary conclusion is unreasonable, in violation of the APA. 
 
f. The Coalition supports a Probabilistic Risk Assessment approach for the 
water quality standards program 
 
If EPA wants to develop granular criteria that adequately protect high consuming 
subpopulations, including tribal subpopulations, the use of Probabilistic Risk Assessment (PRA) 
is very well-suited to this task, and we recommend that EPA adopt it for the water quality 
standards program. See U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of the Science Advisor, 
Risk Assessment Forum White Paper: Probabilistic Risk Assessment Methods and Case Studies, 
iii (2014) (noting that “risk assessors, risk managers and others, particularly within the scientific 
and research divisions, have recognized that more sophisticated statistical and mathematical 
approaches could be utilized to enhance the quality and accuracy of Agency risk assessments”). 
As an alternative, PRA allows different risk levels to be targeted to different subsets of the 
population, and final water quality standards can be chosen such that the risk levels are 
concurrently met for each subpopulation. PRA aligns with current EPA risk recommendations, 
while the departure described in the proposed rule is not consistent with EPA recommendations, 
nor has it been justified from past EPA interpretations of what the CWA requires.  
 
Inconsistent with EPA’s longstanding recommendations, the proposed rule would disallow states 
and TAS tribes from applying a 10-4 risk rate for tribal subpopulations. According to EPA’s 
methodology for developing human health water quality standards, a 10-4 risk target is 
considered de minimis and protective of public health, and therefore the use of risk targets lower 
than 10-4 may decrease the numerical water quality criteria but does not necessarily increase the 
associated level of protection. See U.S. EPA Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality 
Criteria for the Protection of Human Health (2000). Eliminating the 10-4 rate as a potential risk 
target for subpopulations unnecessarily limits the utility of modern risk assessment approaches, 
such as PRA, which has the ability to consider multiple risk targets in various subpopulations, 
and protect all subpopulations concurrently at different levels.  See Memorandum from National 
Council for Air and Stream Improvement (NCASI) to the American Forest & Paper Association 
(AF&PA), Technical Comments on EPA’s Proposed Rule: Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 (Feb 28, 
2023). 
 
6 EPA admits that tribes “may choose to incur costs, such as legal fees or costs to complete scientific studies to 
support their position on the scope and nature of their rights and/or water quality necessary to protect them.” EPA 
Economic Analysis (November 2022), 3.  

 
17 
 
 
Eliminating consideration of baseline risk (e.g., 10-4) for small subpopulations reduces the 
scientific validity and efficiency of risk assessments and increases the propensity of compounded 
conservatism. These outcomes do not reduce risk to exposed populations and can lead to 
unachievable water quality criteria, where the numeric criteria are more stringent than the natural 
background or even detection levels, or the resulting criteria cannot be met using cost-effective 
technologies. Id.   
 
As some states have begun to rely on PRA, EPA has recognized its value as best available 
science. See U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of the Science Advisor, Risk 
Assessment Forum White Paper: Probabilistic Risk Assessment Methods and Case Studies, iii 
(2014). Therefore, as EPA considers developing risk levels, the agency should use PRA as a 
more granular approach that can enable EPA to achieve specific levels of risk for specific 
populations. 
 
IV. 
The proposed rule exceeds CWA authorities and implicates the “major 
questions” doctrine  
 
As an executive agency, EPA has only those powers given to it by Congress. After fifty years of 
CWA implementation, the proposed rule would purport to grant new authorities to EPA and 
would upend the CWA’s longstanding framework that puts states and TAS tribes on equal 
footing as the primary administrators of CWA programs. The proposal would grant EPA powers 
to interpret treaties and other agreements among sovereigns, incorporate explicit or implied 
reserved rights into the CWA framework, and adjudicate disputes among sovereigns.7 EPA cites 
no authority in the CWA for this expansive proposal, because there is none. Rather, EPA asserts 
that its discretionary authority to implement the CWA allows it to create these new rights and 
obligations under a statute that is more than 50 years old.   
 
As noted above, the proposed rule quotes only one provision from the CWA concerning treaties: 
“This Act shall not be construed as… affecting or impairing the provisions of any treaty of the 
United States.” 87 Fed. Reg. 74363, 74365, citing 33 U.S.C. 1371(a). This provision does not 
create an affirmative responsibility for EPA or any other federal or state agency to manage water 
resources for the benefit, the best interest, or the needs of any other party to a treaty with the 
United States. To be clear, CWA section 511 applies to all treaties and does not specifically 
reference tribal treaties or any other instrument related to tribes.  
 
As recently as 2014, EPA argued in court that compliance with the CWA and its regulations was 
sufficient to satisfy any treaty-driven trust obligation. In Sierra Club v. McLerran, No. 2:11-cv-
01759-BJR Dkt. No. 91 at 40-43 (W.D. Wash. Jan. 29, 2014), EPA argued that, “in the absence 
 
7 The Coalition recognizes the existing dispute resolution provision in 40 CFR §131.7 that is authorized by CWA 
section 518(e) and referenced in the proposed rule. However, section 518(e) only authorizes EPA to implement 
dispute resolution when a state and tribe have different water quality standards on a common waterbody. As a 
general matter, the stringency of a water quality standard is appropriately within EPA’s expertise and managing 
disputes on this topic has been expressly authorized by Congress. However, Congress did not, in section 518(e), 
authorize EPA to arbitrate disagreements among sovereigns over the meaning of treaties and other instruments of 
federal law. The proposed rule exceeds the authority provided in CWA section 518 (e). 33 U.S.C. §1377(e). 

 
18 
 
of a specific duty that has been placed on the government with respect to the Tribe, the United 
States’ general trust responsibility is discharged by the agency’s compliance with general 
regulations and statutes not specifically aimed at protecting Indian tribes.” The court agreed with 
EPA and held that the agency had satisfied its trust duty by complying with the CWA. Contrary 
to its obligations under the APA, EPA has not acknowledged this prior agency position in the 
proposed rule, nor has EPA provided an explanation for the change in position.  
 
Additionally, EPA has published this proposal at the same time that the Supreme Court is 
considering whether implied tribal reserved rights create federal trust obligations—these are the 
same “implied reserved rights” that the proposal would require states, TAS tribes, and EPA to 
protect. The proposed rule raises many questions about EPA’s authority to incorporate such 
rights into the statutory CWA program, including whether the agency intends to establish a trust 
obligation through this rulemaking.  
 
The proposal presents issues of great “economic and political significance,” and there is no 
evidence in the CWA, the proposal, or the rulemaking docket that Congress granted EPA these 
authorities. The Supreme Court has observed that “[e]xtraordinary grants of regulatory authority 
are rarely accomplished through ‘modest words,’ ‘vague terms,’ or ‘subtle device[s].’” W. 
Virginia v. Env't Prot. Agency, 142 S. Ct. 2587, 2609 (2022) (citations omitted). In this case, 
there are no modest, vague or subtle statements by Congress because there are no congressional 
words or statements at all that support EPA’s proposal. The Supreme Court has recently rejected 
similar agency actions. See, e.g., Nat’l Federation of Indep. Bus. v. OSHA, 142 S.Ct. 661, 
665(2022) (per curiam); Alabama Ass’n. of Realtors v. DHS, 141 S.Ct. 2485, 2487 (2021) (per 
curiam); W. Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2615-16. The Court has been clear that an agency “must point 
to ‘clear congressional authorization’ for the power it claims” when it asserts extraordinary 
authorities. W. Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2609 (2022).   
 
The proposed rule implicates the “major questions” doctrine for other reasons. After more than 
four decades administering the CWA, EPA has now “‘claimed to discover in a long-extant 
statute an unheralded power’ representing a ‘transformative expansion in its regulatory 
authority,” W. Virginia, 142 S. Ct. at 2610 (cleaned up), that it used for the first time in 2015 on 
a limited and state-specific basis, and which has never applied nationwide.  EPA’s reliance on 
section 511(a), 33 U.S.C. § 1371(a), as support for expanding its authority to narrow state and 
TAS tribal discretion under section 303(c) has parallels to the Agency’s location of “newfound 
power in the vague language of an ancillary provision of the Act” that the court rejected in W. 
Virginia.  Id.  And just as in W. Virginia, “the Agency’s discovery allowed it to adopt a 
regulatory program that Congress had conspicuously and repeatedly declined to enact itself”—in 
this case, a different water quality standards program for waters subject to tribal reserved rights.  
Id.   
 
Relatedly, the proposed rule does not pass muster under SWANCC. In that case, EPA and the 
Army Corps of Engineers claimed federal jurisdiction under the CWA that “would result in a 
significant impingement of the States’ traditional and primary power over land and water use.” 
531 U.S. at 174. The Supreme Court explained that “[w]here an administrative interpretation of a 
statute invokes the outer limits of Congress’ power, we expect a clear indication that Congress 
intended that result,” id. at 172, especially “where the administrative interpretation alters the 

 
19 
 
federal-state framework by permitting federal encroachment upon a traditional state power.” Id. 
at 173. As Congress had not provided any such clear statement, the Court “reject[ed] the 
[Agencies’] request for administrative deference” to their claim of jurisdiction. Id. at 174. 
Similarly, in this case, there is no evidence, much less clear evidence, that Congress intended to 
grant EPA the power to override states’ land use powers by claiming a power to authoritatively 
interpret tribal reserved rights in reviewing and approving state water quality standards. 
 
For all of the reasons detailed above, the proposed rule violates the APA, exceeds EPA’s 
statutory authority, and implicates the “major questions” doctrine.  
 
V. 
The Economic Analysis is flawed and underestimates potential impacts of the 
proposed rule  
 
The agency’s Economic Analysis (EA) significantly underestimates the likely costs for states and 
TAS tribes to implement the rule and completely ignores the likely significant costs to the 
regulated community. The EA is fatally flawed and must be withdrawn. 
 
The EA acknowledges that “states and EPA would bear the majority of the burden for 
determining the extent of reserved rights and water quality necessary to protect those rights.” EA 
3. To assess these costs, EPA estimated that states would undertake three rulemakings to update 
CWA programs to meet the requirements in the proposal. EPA estimated that the first 
rulemaking would be the most burdensome for states, requiring a range of 100-500 hours of 
effort to promulgate a new state rule. EPA estimates the second and third rules to be less 
burdensome, with 90-450 and 75-375 hours of effort, respectively.  
 
EPA asserts that, for the most burdensome rulemaking, five state employees working full time 
(40 hours per week) could complete a rulemaking process—from development, drafting, 
proposal, public engagement, responding to public comments, revising, and finalizing a rule—in 
a little more than two weeks’ time (5 employees x 100 hours each / 40 hours per week = 2.5 
weeks). Alternatively, EPA would assume that a single state employee could work full time and 
complete this process in a little over three months. (1 employee x 500 hours / 40 hours per week 
= 12.5 weeks). These estimates of state staff hours needed to develop, propose, and finalize a 
rule are unreasonably low and must be reworked to acknowledge that state rulemaking 
procedures, like federal rulemaking procedures, typically take years to complete. EPA also 
unreasonably assumes that there would be no ongoing costs for states to implement or enforce 
the proposed rule. EPA’s estimates lack credibility.  
 
Notably, the EA cost estimates do not include the time or resources that states would incur to 
investigate claims relating to tribal reserved rights, including the geographic or substantive 
extent of those rights, or to develop tools to assess whether such rights are already protected, or 
what additional incremental protection may be necessary to meet the requirements of the rule. 
Further, the EA assumes that all states have equal amounts of staffing, resources, and expertise in 
tribal-related matters to devote to such an effort. Not all state agencies have the same resources, 
and some may have very little experience dealing with tribal reserved rights, if any at all. If the 
proposed rule is finalized, such states would likely have to increase staffing, hire expert 
consultants, or otherwise develop the competency needed to address complex tribal matters. This 

 
20 
 
would likely increase the cost and time needed for states to complete rulemakings. As noted 
above, the proposed rule could lead to vast numbers of impaired waters that would require 
significant long-term dedication of qualified resources for monitoring, assessment, and TMDLs.  
EPA makes no attempt to define these resource requirements in the proposed rule. 
 
Also as noted above, the EA cost estimates also do not include the likely billions of dollars in 
costs that the regulated community would incur across the nation as a result of the proposal. 
When EPA promulgated federal water quality standards in Washington, employing the policies 
that the proposed rule would codify, businesses estimated that the compliance costs would be in 
the billions of dollars. See Attachment: Treatment Technology Review and Assessment (HDR, 
2022) (previously submitted to EPA with public comments on EPA’s Proposed Human Health 
Water Quality Criteria for the State of Washington (87 Fed. Reg. 19046 (April 1, 2022))). The 
proposed rule would mandate these practices in all states with tribal reserved rights, easily 
elevating costs into the tens or hundreds of billions of dollars. Such costs would be borne by 
communities and businesses of all sizes, including small businesses. EPA and the SBA Office of 
Advocacy should convene a Small Business Advocacy Review panel to evaluate the proposed 
rule in accordance with the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act. Additionally, 
there may be significant cost impacts on small and disadvantaged communities that EPA has not 
considered. 
 
VI. 
EPA Has Failed to Reasonably Consider the Potential Impacts of the Proposed 
Rule, Including Costs, and Must Perform and Consider a Full Cost-Benefit 
Analysis 
 
In the economic analysis section of the preamble, EPA states the following: 
 
“Pursuant to Executive Orders 12866 (Regulatory Planning and Review) and 13563 
(Improving Regulation and Regulatory Review), EPA has prepared an economic analysis 
to inform the public of potential costs and benefits of this proposed rule. This analysis is 
not required by the CWA.” 
 
87 Fed. Reg. 74373 (emphasis added). EPA acknowledges that the rule could lead to additional 
compliance costs for regulated entities to meet permit limits that would be put in place as a result 
of this rule. However, EPA states that, because of uncertainty, it was unable to estimate costs to 
regulated entities and instead focuses on administrative costs to state governments. EPA sought 
comment on its economic analysis. 87 Fed. Reg. 74373.  
 
In a line of cases from Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n, Inc. v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 
U.S. 29 (1983) to Entergy Corp. v. Riverkeeper, 556 U.S. 208 (2009), to Michigan v. EPA, 135 
S. Ct. 2699 (2015), the Supreme Court has made clear that agencies such as EPA must weigh 
costs and benefits, absent a statutory prohibition to the contrary.  
 
In Michigan, the Court made clear that statutory language such as “appropriate and necessary” is 
the kind of “capacious” language that requires the consideration of all relevant factors, including 
cost. See 135 S. Ct. at 2707. All nine justices agreed that “[c]ost is almost always a relevant, and 
usually, a highly important factor in regulation. Unless Congress provides otherwise, an agency 

 
21 
 
acts unreasonably in establishing a standard-setting process that ignore[s] economic 
considerations.” Id. at 2716-17 (Kagan, J., dissenting). Nothing in the relevant language of the 
CWA relieves EPA from this obligation, and the proposed rule fails to provide meaningful 
estimates of the costs that would result from the rule and does not attempt to estimate costs on 
regulated entities. EPA likewise does not reasonably compare the costs with the benefits likely to 
occur, nor does EPA consider reasonable alternatives. Indeed, Section 501(1) of the CWA—
cited by EPA as authority for the Proposed Rule—delegates to the EPA Administrator the 
authority to “prescribe such regulations as are necessary to carry out his functions” under the 
Act. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74363; 33 U.S.C. § 1361(a) (emphasis added). This capacious phrase, “as 
are necessary,” requires the Administrator to consider all relevant factors, including cost. 
Likewise, Section 304(a) directs the Administrator, in developing water quality criteria, to 
develop information “on the factors necessary” to restore and maintain the relevant waters and 
wildlife. 33 U.S.C. § 1314(a) (emphasis added ). Furthermore, Section 303(c) makes clear that 
water quality standards “shall be established taking into consideration their use and value for 
public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational purposes, and agricultural, 
industrial, and other purposes, and also taking into consideration their use and value for 
navigation.” 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c) (emphasis added). Thus, EPA has broad discretion to consider 
all relevant factors, including impacts such as costs, and must do so to avoid being arbitrary.  
 
EPA acknowledges in the preamble that the rule, if finalized as proposed, would impose costs on 
regulated entities and non-point sources. While non-point sources are not typically subject to 
NPDES permitting, states and TAS tribes can and do regulate non-point sources through water 
quality standards, as mandated by CWA section 208(b)(2). In short, if EPA proceeds to require 
states and TAS tribes to implement an interpretation of tribal reserved rights in state water 
quality standards, that would lead to more stringent TMDLs, and states and TAS tribes 
foreseeably would allocate some reductions to non-point sources. Examples of reductions would 
likely come from stormwater management or other control measures. EPA must fully account for 
and consider all such foreseeable likely consequences of its rule, including likely costs that 
would be imposed on various sources, including point and non-point sources. 
 
VII. 
Conclusion 
 
The proposed rule exceeds EPA’s statutory authority and would impose significant costs and 
burdens on states, TAS tribes, and the regulated communities represented by this Coalition. EPA 
has not acknowledged, let alone considered, these significant costs and burdens, nor has it 
weighed the costs and benefits, as the agency is required to do by law. EPA has also not 
demonstrated that the existing water quality standards program and framework are inadequate to 
protect the environment or human health or presented any scientific, technical, or public health 
information to support the proposed rule. The Coalition supports efforts to promote tribal self-
determination and believes that the existing water quality standards framework provides more 
than adequate tools to ensure the protection of tribal uses. The proposed rule is not lawful or 
implementable and the Coalition respectfully requests that EPA withdraw the proposal and work 
in a cooperative manner with state, tribal, and private sector stakeholders to address all relevant 
concerns.  
 
 

 
22 
 
Please feel free to contact us with questions or if you wish to discuss. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
American Exploration & Mining Association 
American Farm Bureau Federation 
American Forest & Paper Association 
Essential Minerals Association  
National Mining Association 
The Fertilizer Institute 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0250 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
634 W. Main Street #300, Madison, WI 53703 
608-251-7020 | www.cleanwisconsin.org  
 
 
 
 
March 6, 2023 
Ms. Jennifer Brundage 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
Office of Water  
Standards and Health Protection Division (4305T)  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
Submitted via regulations.gov portal. 
 
Clean Wisconsin, on behalf of its members and supporters around the state, submits 
these comments along with Midwest Environmental Advocates and River Alliance of 
Wisconsin.  
 
Clean Wisconsin advocates for clean water and clean air for all who reside within the 
state’s borders, including those who have been here long before Wisconsin became a 
state.  
 
Midwest Environmental Advocates is a nonprofit law center that combines the power of 
law with the resolve of communities facing environmental injustice to secure and 
protect the rights of all people to healthy water, land, and air. 
 
River Alliance of Wisconsin is a statewide nonprofit, nonpartisan advocacy organization 
that has empowered people to protect and restore Wisconsin’s waters for thirty-years. 
 
 
The State of Wisconsin includes areas ceded by treaty—the Ceded Territory—in which 
Tribes reserved the right to hunt, fish, and gather, including the harvesting of wild rice. 
Wisconsin’s territorial and state governments did not respect these Tribal reserved 
rights, however, and Tribes in Wisconsin have endured a long struggle to vindicate their 
treaty rights.1 Full exercise of these Tribal reserved rights relies on clean water, and 
water pollution has been and continues to be a problem in parts of the Ceded Territory.  
 
We therefore welcome EPA’s proposed rule to require water quality standards (WQS) to 
protect Tribal reserved rights (“the Proposed Rule”). The Proposed Rule is squarely 
within the purpose and design of the Clean Water Act and will bring much needed 
clarity and consistency to how WQS protect Tribal reserved rights. It will also prevent an 
 
1 See e.g., Bennet Goldstein, How Ojibwe tribes in Wisconsin resisted efforts to deny treaty rights, 
Wisconsin Watch (February 24, 2023), https://wisconsinwatch.org/2023/02/how-ojibwe-tribes-in-
wisconsin-resisted-efforts-to-deny-treaty-rights/. 

 
634 W. Main Street #300, Madison, WI 53703 
608-251-7020 | www.cleanwisconsin.org  
unnecessary replay of EPA’s harmful and illegal 2020 disavowal of the critical role of 
Tribal reserved rights in WQS actions.2  
 
We submit these comments to highlight a few Wisconsin-specific issues, encourage EPA 
to avoid implementation pitfalls, and weigh in on issues for which EPA has requested 
comment. 
  
Water Quality Challenges Impacting Tribal Reserved Rights in Wisconsin 
 
The Proposed Rule acknowledges that lowered water quality threatens the full exercise 
of Tribal reserved rights like the right to hunt, fish, and gather, and that this threat 
includes the growing specter of climate change. We note a few challenges and 
opportunities in Wisconsin, and how the Proposed Rule might affect them. 
 
It is axiomatic that meaningful exercise of these treaty rights depends on clean water.3 
Aquatic plant and animal species cannot thrive in contaminated water. And what does 
grow may be unsafe to consume if it is contaminated with harmful pollutants. The right 
to fish or gather wild rice thus risks becoming illusory where water quality suffers.  
 
We have unfortunately seen contamination in waters that support, or could support, the 
exercise of treaty rights in Wisconsin. Fish are often contaminated with PFAS, PBCs, 
mercury, and/or other contaminants.4 Wisconsin has a general statewide fish advisory 
because of these contaminants.5 Where these and other pollutants render fish unsafe to 
eat in quantities commensurate with the customary and traditional fishing behavior of 
the rights holders, those rights treaty rights are fundamentally compromised. 
 
We also know that wild rice faces a series of threats, including water quality impacts 
from contaminants like sulfate.6 Unless water quality is protected, there is reason to fear 
that wild rice growth will continue to be impaired in Wisconsin. 
 
We would be remiss if we did not note the impact of climate change on treaty rights in 
Wisconsin. Lake Superior is one of the fastest warming lakes in the world, and this 
warming will have profound effects on the plants, animals, and people that reside in this 
region. This will put stress on fish and plant species underlying the exercise of Tribal 
 
2 See Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74366 
(December 5, 2022). 
3 See, e.g., Michigan v. U.S. EPA, 581 F.3d 524, 525 (7th Cir. 2009) (finding that Tribal activities “require 
the use of pure natural resources derived from a clean environment.”). 
4 See, e.g., Bennet Goldstein, Great Lakes pollution threatens Ojibwe treaty rights to fish, Wisconsin 
Watch (February 24, 2023), https://wisconsinwatch.org/2023/02/great-lakes-pollution-ojibwe-treaty-
rights-to-fish/. 
5 See Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, “Eating Your Catch – Making Healthy Choices, 
https://dnr.wisconsin.gov/topic/Fishing/consumption (accessed March 3, 2023). 
6 See Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources, Strategic Analysis of Wild Rice Management in 
Wisconsin (September 2021) at ii (noting that wild rice “abundance and distribution … has decreased 
significantly over the past century.”) and 23-26 (discussing water quality impacts on wild rice growth), 
https://widnr.widen.net/s/kdzjncbfbg/wildricemgmtsa_finalreport_sept2021_with-appendices 
(accessed Mar. 6, 2023). 

 
634 W. Main Street #300, Madison, WI 53703 
608-251-7020 | www.cleanwisconsin.org  
reserved rights in the Ceded Territory. We need dramatically increased efforts to build 
resilience into our ecosystems and, where necessary, adapt to a warming climate. 
Improving water quality where it is impaired and preserving water quality where it is 
high is one step we can and must take as soon as possible as the effects of climate 
change increasingly impact northern Wisconsin and the Ceded Territory. 
 
Recognition of Tribal Knowledge Must be Meaningful for the Proposed Rule 
to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
While supportive of the Proposed Rule, we note a couple of pitfalls that could frustrate 
the Rule’s desired effect.  
 
First, the Proposed Rule will be ineffective in supporting the full exercise of treaty rights 
in Wisconsin unless EPA, DNR, and other government actors listen to the Tribes and 
their members, i.e., the rights holders, when it comes to where treaty rights are 
currently being exercised, could be exercised in the future, and where aquatic and 
aquatic-related resources are located. This must be a core component of the “available 
data and information” referenced in the proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a). This is necessary 
to ensure that water quality standards are applied to all waters that support the exercise 
of Tribal reserved rights, and not a reduced geographical area that fails to reflect the 
lived experience and knowledge of the Tribes.  
 
EPA observes that determining where treaty rights apply, and where the aquatic and 
aquatic-related resources can be found, can be a difficult and complicated inquiry. This 
is true to some extent, but we note that both DNR and Tribes have made efforts to 
collect data and map the distribution and location of wild rice and other aquatic and 
aquatic-related resources.7 Recognizing and incorporating the tremendous work the 
Tribes have done, and continue to do, would facilitate application of water quality 
standards that protect treaty rights in Wisconsin.  
 
Second, and related, in proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(1) EPA is proposing that water 
quality standards be determined such that the exercise of rights be “unsuppressed by 
water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-related resource.” EPA states that 
determining what “unsuppressed” means in a given context should “balance heritage 
use of a resource with what is currently reasonably achievable for a particular 
waterbody.” EPA further states that current and planned restoration efforts should be 
considered when determining whether a given water could again support the exercise of 
a Tribal reserved right, including the specific example of wild rice gathering. We agree. 
But we also observe that the Proposed Rule will not fully respect Tribal reserved rights if 
past pollution and development are too readily taken as a reason to give up on waters 
that could again support the aquatic and aquatic-related resources underlying the 
Tribes’ treaty rights. And as with our first point, the voice and input of the rights holders 
themselves regarding which waters might fit this description must be given great weight. 
The Tribes have undertaken extensive wild rice restoration efforts, and these must be 
 
7 Id. at 44 (acknowledging the extensive efforts of the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission to 
inventory wild rice locations in the Ceded Territory). 

 
634 W. Main Street #300, Madison, WI 53703 
608-251-7020 | www.cleanwisconsin.org  
fully credited. Otherwise, what state regulators subsequently determined to be 
“reasonable” or “feasible” may result in incomplete achievement of the Proposed Rule’s 
objectives. 
 
The Proposed Rule Would Clarify Wisconsin’s Duty to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights; Proper Implementation of the Proposed Rule Helps Fulfill 
That Duty. 
 
The Proposed Rule would help clarify Wisconsin’s options for fulfilling its duty to 
protect Tribal Reserved Rights, including addressing water quality impacts to wild rice 
in the Ceded Territory. EPA discusses multiple compliance options for states, including 
the adoption of designated uses that explicitly reflect Tribal reserved rights. DNR has 
previously considered establishing wild rice as a designated use.8 DNR has also explored 
creation of a corresponding sulfate water quality criteria for wild rice.9 Creation of these 
WQS could help alleviate water quality impacts to wild rice in Wisconsin. 
 
While laying out the benefits of these WQS, DNR has also identified “legislative 
opposition and legal challenges” as practical obstacles to promulgation.10 The Proposed 
Rule would help clear any legal ambiguity around the appropriateness of these WQS. In 
other words, Wisconsin has been ready to take additional steps to revise WQS to protect 
Tribal reserved rights, and this rulemaking would solidify the legal basis for doing so. 
Indeed, whatever option EPA selects, DNR would be required to update its delegated 
program accordingly to ensure that program remains in compliance with the Clean 
Water Act. 
 
But even if EPA promulgates the Proposed Rule and DNR adopts appropriate WQS that 
comply with the Proposed Rule, permitting and enforcement decisions must 
consistently implement those WQS. Permitting authorities must not only have the 
authority, but also have the staff time and resources necessary, to turn these WQS into 
meaningful permit terms that protect water quality, and bring enforcement actions 
when those terms are not being met. For this reason, we urge that EPA’s review of state 
programs and state proposed WQS pay special attention to how WQS promulgated 
pursuant to this rule are being implemented and enforced by each state.  
 
Issues for Which EPA Requested Comment: The Role of Antidegradation 
Policy and Revising Designated Uses for Waters Where Attainment Not 
Currently Feasible. 
 
1. The Role of Antidegradation in Protecting Tribal Reserved Rights. 
EPA asks for comment on whether antidegradation policy options could be used “in lieu 
of” the designated use and water quality criteria-based options in proposed 40 C.F.R. § 
131.9(c)(1) and (2).11 EPA raises two potential options. First, assigning Outstanding 
 
8 Id. at 99. 
9 Id. 
10 Id. 
11 87 Fed. Reg. 74371. 

 
634 W. Main Street #300, Madison, WI 53703 
608-251-7020 | www.cleanwisconsin.org  
National Resource Water (ONRW) status to water bodies with water quality higher than 
necessary to protect Tribal reserved rights. Second, by amending a state’s 
antidegradation policy to require that any lowering of water quality in a high quality 
water continues to protect applicable reserved rights.  
 
DNR is currently in the process of promulgating revisions to its antidegradation policy. 
Clean Wisconsin and Midwest Environmental Advocates were members of the 
stakeholder advisory group DNR convened to aid drafting of those much-needed 
updates to Wisconsin’s antidegradation rules. If DNR’s current proposed revisions to its 
antidegradation policy are enacted, DNR would have the authority to treat any ONRW 
as high quality waters and subject them to antidegradation review. To achieve the 
second option would require amending DNR’s antidegradation policy after finalization 
of the Proposed Rule. It is unclear whether the administrative burden associated with 
attempting to amend DNR’s antidegradation policy almost immediately after amending 
that policy for the first time in over 25 years is feasible. 
 
Regardless of any state-level administrative burden, we hesitate to support an 
antidegradation-only approach because, while EPA is potentially correct that protecting 
waters where the quality is already high may be cheaper in the short run than restoring 
waters with diminished water quality, this would limit the reach of the Proposed Rule in 
a way that would fail to fully respect Tribal reserved rights. Given ongoing efforts to 
restore waterways in the Ceded Territory, for aquatic life and wild rice growth, an 
antidegradation approach in lieu of the proposed approach would be incomplete. Such 
an approach would also be antithetical to a core objective of the Clean Water Act, i.e., to 
both maintain and restore “the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the 
Nation’s waters.”12  
 
For these reasons, we prefer the use of currently proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(c)(1) and 
(2) to set designated uses and water quality criteria, with the requirement that states 
also includes provisions in the antidegradation policy that protect Tribal reserved rights. 
In other words, the use of “and/or” in proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(c)(2) should be 
changed to simply “and” to avoid the option of an antidegradation-only approach for 
complying with the Proposed Rule.  
 
2. Revising Designated Uses that Protect Tribal Reserved Rights. 
EPA asks for comment on whether there should be “discrete additions” to the current 
framework, providing for whether and how designated uses can be revised by states 
while also ensuring protection of Tribal reserved rights.13 EPA should have specific rules 
for revising designated uses for waters implicated by the Proposed Rule, because 
revising a designated use in a way that fails to protect Tribal reserved rights could 
potentially violate federal law, i.e., the underlying treaty. There should therefore be 
special solicitude for “continu[ing] to strive for attainment”, as EPA suggests, to ensure 
that these Clean Water Act implementing regulations square with the federal 
 
12 33. U.S.C. § 1251(1)(a). 
13 87 Fed. Reg. 74372. 

 
634 W. Main Street #300, Madison, WI 53703 
608-251-7020 | www.cleanwisconsin.org  
government’s legal obligations. This is particularly salient given the fact that Tribal 
members are not the ones who created the “human caused conditions or … pollution” 
that have made waters in the Ceded Territory too polluted to sustain traditional and 
customary levels of fish consumption or historical levels of wild rice growth.14 We 
therefore recommend that EPA consider adding provisions that understand use 
attainability in this unique context. 
 
 
/s/ Evan Feinauer 
 
Staff Attorney 
Clean Wisconsin 
efeinauer@cleanwisconsin.org  
608.251.7020 x321. 
 
Rob Lee, Staff Attorney 
Midwest Environmental Advocates 
rlee@midwestadvocates.org 
(608) 251-5047 x. 8 
 
Bill Davis, Senior Legal Analyst 
River Alliance of Wisconsin 
612 W. Main St., suite 200  
Madison WI, 53703 
608-257-2424 x118  
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 40 C.F.R. § 131.10(g)(3).

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0283 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 2023 
1 
Upper Snake River Tribes Foundation 
 
UPPER SNAKE RIVER TRIBES FOUNDATION, INC. 
3380 W. Americana Terrace, Suite 360 
Boise, ID 83706  
(208) 331-7880    
Mr. Michael S. Regan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 6, 2023 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
RE: USRT Comments on Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, Proposed Water Quality 
Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights
Dear Administrator Regan:  
The Upper Snake River Tribes (USRT) Foundation submits the following comments to the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on the proposed Water Quality Standards (WQS) 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Proposed Rule).  
USRT is composed of four Indian tribes of the Upper Snake River region in Idaho, Nevada, and 
Oregon: the Burns Paiute Tribe, Fort McDermitt Paiute-Shoshone Tribe, Shoshone-Bannock 
Tribes of the Fort Hall Reservation, and Shoshone-Paiute Tribes of the Duck Valley Reservation.  
While the members of USRT currently reside within the Upper Snake River region, their aboriginal 
areas of use extend far beyond the region in all geographic directions. The four tribes have common 
vested interests to protect rights reserved through the United States Constitution, federal treaties, 
federal unratified treaties (including but not limited to the Fort Boise Treaty of 1864, Malheur 
Treaty of 1864, Bruneau Treaty of 1866, and Long Tom Creek Treaty of 1867), executive orders, 
inherent rights, and aboriginal title to the land, which has never been extinguished by USRT 
member tribes. USRT works to ensure the protection, enhancement, and preservation of the tribes’ 
rights, resources, cultural properties, and practices and that they remain secured.  These include 
but are not limited to hunting, fishing, gathering, and subsistence uses. 
The USRT tribes have a common vested interest in protecting their reserved rights and the rights 
of all tribes in the U.S. Many tribes hold rights to natural and cultural resources that are reserved 
or held by tribes. As described by EPA, these rights can either be “expressly or implicitly held 
through treaties, statues, executive orders, or other sources of Federal law” (Proposed Rule, 87 
Fed. Reg. at 74363). Historically, tribal communities have suffered negative health and cultural 
implications due to regulatory systems that do not adequately protect or recognize tribal reserved 
rights. In the Proposed Rule, the EPA is taking significant steps to protect aquatic and aquatic-
dependent resources reserved to tribes through proposed revisions to the federal WQS  regulations. 

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 
COMMENTS ON DOCKET ID NO. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Final 
 
March 2023 
2 
Upper Snake River Tribes Foundation 
 
USRT enthusiastically supports this proposed ruling. The following sections detail comments, 
concerns, and questions that USRT has regarding this proposed ruling.   
Section 131.3 (Definitions)  
● USRT agrees with EPA’s proposed definition of tribal reserved rights in the new 40 C.F.R. 
§ 131.3(r) as “rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by 
tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other 
sources of Federal law” but with one revision. Tribal reserved rights include resources that 
are outside of the definition of aquatic or aquatic-dependent. The language must clarify 
that there are other reserved rights that may apply, but that this ruling refers specifically to 
aquatic and aquatic-dependent. An example of this can be found with the Shoshone-
Bannock Tribes, who have treaty rights to hunt on all unoccupied lands of the U.S., not 
just in or adjacent water bodies.  
Section 131.5 (EPA Authority)  
● USRT strongly supports the requirement that WQS must protect tribal reserved rights and 
that EPA must disapprove WQS that do not meet these requirements.  
Section 131.6 (Minimum Requirements for WQS Submission)  
● EPA should revise the ruling to allow right holders to request that certain information about 
tribal reserved rights be kept confidential.  
● How must assertions of reserved rights be demonstrated by the tribes? Specification of 
what types of data would satisfy the requirement of EPA would be beneficial. USRT also 
feels it would be extremely valuable for EPA to allow the use of Traditional Ecological 
Knowledge (TEK) should the tribe(s) feel it appropriate to use in determining WQS.  
Section 131.9 (Protection of Tribal Reserved Rights) 
● USRT holds that tribal reserved rights should be protected so that the health of tribal 
members will not be subject to any greater risk level than the general population. This can 
be accomplished by treating the right holders as the target population. In general, that will 
mean use of a 10-6 acceptable cancer risk level, not “at least 10-5” referenced in the 
Proposed Rule at 74369. USRT would like more information on how tribal risk level is to 
be determined.  
● During the tribal consultation process, what happens if the right holder disagrees with 
EPA’s conclusion? Will there be an opportunity to dispute the resolution through other 
avenues than consultation? For many tribes, consultation may be treated as a “checking the 
box” activity. It would be valuable to provide the tribes with additional opportunities to 
engage with EPA on WQS.  
● USRT suggests requiring state submissions explaining the consultation procedure they 
followed and a justification for not adopting suggestions made by the right holders. 

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 
COMMENTS ON DOCKET ID NO. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Final 
 
March 2023 
3 
Upper Snake River Tribes Foundation 
 
● Will EPA take into account historic uses of water bodies? Many tribes are working to 
restore cultural and natural resources. In some cases, tribes are unable to practice their 
reserved rights due to interferences, such as dams. If restoration of these cultural resources 
does occur, how will EPA incorporate those practices into revised WQS?  
● USRT supports the requirement that WQS must designate uses and establish water quality 
criteria to protect those uses. USRT holds that to protect reserved rights, the 
antidegradation requirements should be required in addition to the designated uses and 
water quality criteria, rather than instead.  
● USRT is also concerned about the implications of tribes sharing certain information and 
data with states relating to fish consumption. For example, tribes in Idaho were hesitant to 
participate in surveys about their fish consumption (burbot, lamprey, steelhead, & 
sturgeon) because the state could suggest that tribes are not fully exercising their reserved 
rights. USRT feels that language should be developed in the ruling to ensure that any data 
shared will not be used to limit or challenge tribal reserved rights. 
● USRT supports EPA’s expressed requirement that WQS must protect “unsuppressed” 
tribal reserved rights (§ 131.9(a)(1)).  
● USRT holds that tribes should be treated as the target population for establishing human 
health criteria rather than a subpopulation of highly exposed individuals.  
Section 131.20 (State Review and Revision of WQS)  
● USRT agrees that requiring a triennial review of WQS should “include evaluating whether 
there are tribal reserved rights applicable to State water and whether water quality standards 
need to be revised to protect those rights pursuant to § 131.9.” However, USRT strongly 
suggests that EPA provide a clear process to ensure that states work directly with right 
holders to determine the reserved rights and water quality standards. This could be 
accomplished by requiring states to contact all tribes in their borders and meet with them 
separately from the general public.  
● It is understood that the triennial review process does not take place every three years. EPA 
should require the review of WQS to take place within a minimum of two years of the 
effective date of this rulemaking.  
● EPA should consider how certain states may enact this ruling. Idaho is a prime example of 
a state that has historically and repeatedly ignored tribal rights when determining WQS and 
fish consumption rates. USRT would like more information on how EPA plans to handle 
push-back from states. 
Tribal reserved rights, protected by the Clean Water Act and by the Constitution, have been 
neglected far too long. USRT recognizes this is a monumental step in the right direction, but feels 
EPA should consider more robust approaches to engaging with tribal communities, clarifying the 

ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 
COMMENTS ON DOCKET ID NO. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Final 
 
March 2023 
4 
Upper Snake River Tribes Foundation 
 
process for state and tribal interaction to determine WQS and tribal reserved rights, and building 
trust between tribes and the agency/states. USRT, along with the submission of these comments, 
incorporates fully the comments submitted by the National Tribal Water Council.  
Should EPA want any additional information regarding USRT’s stance on this ruling or our tribes’ 
history working with the state and EPA on WQS, please do not hesitate to contact us.  
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
 
Scott Hauser, Executive Director  
scott.hauser@usrtf.org 
208-331-7880

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0274 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Idaho Association of Commerce & Industry 
 
816 W. Bannock St, Suite 5B │ P. O. Box 389 │ Boise, ID 83701 
 
(208) 343-1849 │ www.iaci.org 
 
Submitted via www.regulations.gov 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791. 
 
March 6, 2023 
 
Ms. Jennifer Brundage 
Office of Water, Standards, and Health Protection Division (4305T) 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue N.W. 
Washington D.C.  20460 
 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
 
On December 5, 2022, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published a proposed rule titled, “Water Quality 
Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights.” 87 FR 74361 (Dec 5, 2022).  The proposal is intended 
to modify the Clean Water Act (CWA) water quality standards program, promulgated at 40 CFR Part 131, to create 
additional requirements for states, tribes, and the federal government when promulgating water quality standards related to 
“tribal reserved rights”.   
 
These comments are submitted by the Idaho Association of Commerce and Industry (IACI) is the leading trade association 
of Idaho businesses and represents hundreds of employer members of all sizes engaged in diverse commercial and industrial 
enterprises throughout the state.  This proposed rule is of direct interest of the IACI membership as its members will be 
affected by changes to water quality standards, including NPDES (IPDES) permit discharge requirements and potentially 
water rights, that will occur if this rule is finalized.   
 
This proposed rule dramatically impinges on states' rights to develop water quality standards as specifically reserved to the 
states by Congress in the Clean Water Act.  This is a substantial change to the Clean Water Act water quality standards 
program is based on EPA''s attempt to interpret Tribal treaty rights (something the agency has no expertise in doing) to 
mandate such a result.  Rather than requiring states to look at current conditions of state waters in setting standards, the 
proposed Rule mandates that states must now consider (or speculate) what water quality conditions and aquatic resources 
in state waters were like when Tribal treaties were executed in the middle of the 19th Century and set the standards 
accordingly.  Such an approach is contrary to the scientific rigor required by the Clean Water Act.   Finally, the proposed 
rule will uniquely impact the State of Idaho not only because of the number of tribal treaties that might impact be interpreted 
by EPA to require Idaho to follow the proposed rule, but the State of Idaho went through a lengthy standard setting process 
between 2014-2019 that included Idaho undertaking a statewide fish consumption study to set water quality standards.   
 
The proposed Rule is a substantial overreach by EPA, to expand Tribal interests beyond anything Congress ever envisioned.  
The proposed rule clearly violates the APA and the CWA. and should not go forward. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Alex LaBeau, President 
 
Attachment 
 
cc: A. Prouty:  Chair – Environmental Committee 
 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  1 | 18 
 
 
 
I.  Introduction 
On December 5, 2022, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published a 
proposed rule titled, “Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights.” 87 Federal Register (FR) 74361 (Dec 5, 2022). The proposed rule (or 
proposal) is intended to modify the Clean Water Act (CWA) water quality standards 
program, promulgated at 40 CFR Part 131, to create additional requirements for states, 
tribes, and the federal government when promulgating water quality standards. Water 
quality standards are the foundation for many other CWA programs, including 
impairment assessments, total maximum daily load (TMDL) development, section 401 
certifications, effluent limits, and permitting decisions under the section 404 and section 
402 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit programs.   
 
The Idaho Association of Commerce and Industry (IACI) is the leading trade association 
of Idaho businesses and represents hundreds of employer members of all sizes 
engaged in diverse commercial and industrial enterprises throughout the state.  This 
proposed rule is of direct interest of the IACI membership as its members will be 
affected by changes to water quality standards, including NPDES (IPDES) permit 
discharge requirements and potentially water rights, that will occur if this rule is 
finalized.   
 
 
II.  Overview of Comments 
EPA’s proposed rule substantially overhauls how states set water quality standards 
which have been in place for over fifty (50) years under the CWA absent any change in 
the law or judicial decisions directing EPA to undertake such an effort. The proposed 
rule, could unlawfully establish an actionable trust obligation on the federal government 
and on states, and, if finalized as proposed, will create new burdens on state agencies, 
the regulated community, and create new conflicts between sovereign states and tribal 
nations. As demonstrated below, EPA has failed to provide rationale or explanation for 
the proposal, failed to consider important aspects of the problems that will be created by 
the proposed rule, and this proposal greatly exceeds its statutory authority and is not in 
accordance with the law. The proposed rule contains numerous internal inconsistencies 
and legal flaws. These are not minor flaws and, if the rule is finalized as proposed, are 
likely to result in litigation and a remand or vacatur of portions of the proposed rule, if 
not the rule in its entirety. .  
 
 
 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  2 | 18 
 
 
 
III.  The Proposed Rule is Unlawful. 
IACI respectfully requests that EPA consider these comments carefully; withdraw the 
proposed rule; engage meaningfully with states, who EPA readily acknowledges will 
bear the burden of any final rule; engage meaningfully with the regulated community; 
consult with the U.S. Justice Department concerning the agency’s ability to create new 
trust obligations for itself and other sovereigns; and reconsider this unlawful effort to 
broaden the CWA well beyond its intended purpose. EPA’s failure to meaningfully 
engage with states and the regulated community on this sweeping overhaul of the water 
quality standards program is evidenced by the agency’s refusal to even extend the sixty 
(60) day comment period on the proposed rule. There are very few, if any, changes 
EPA could make to the rule to minimize or mitigate the risk of litigation. As drafted the 
proposed rule is arbitrary and capricious and not in accordance with the law  under the 
Administrative Procedure Act (APA) and the CWA. 
 
 
A.  The proposed rule is expansive and EPA has failed to consider major aspects 
of the problems that will occur from this proposed rule.  
The proposed rule would require states to protect tribal reserved rights when 
establishing water quality standards under the CWA. The proposal presents far 
reaching regulatory text that would be added to the Code of Federal Regulations and 
binding on states and EPA. However, the scant preamble, which amounts to less than 
18 pages, would lead a reader to believe that actual implementation of the rule would be 
quite narrow. The preamble is inconsistent with the proposed regulatory text and must 
be rewritten to acknowledge the significant impacts this rule would have on water quality 
standards and other water management programs, which are overwhelmingly 
administered states. EPA’s failure to acknowledge the significant impacts of the 
proposal violates  the APA. 
 
The proposed rule defines “tribal reserved rights” extremely broadly to mean “any rights 
to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either 
expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of 
Federal law.” See  87 FR 74363 (emphasis added). The preamble does explain that 
tribal reserved rights “include but are not limited to the rights to fish; gather aquatic 
plants; and to hunt for aquatic-dependent animals. . .  .” This explanation is also 
extremely broad and does not explain the potential scope of such rights. Tellingly, the 
agency requests comment on what other types of reserved rights it should consider, 
indicating that EPA does not know the extent of rights that could or would be protected 
under its own proposal. See 87 FR 74367. The preamble then claims that the proposal’s 
mandate that states and EPA protect these expansive reserved rights is likely to have 
limited application. The agency’s narrow interpretation of its own proposal is 
unreasonable and fails to consider the very real likelihood that this rule would create 
chaos in the water quality standards program and likely generate decades-long 
litigation.  
 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  3 | 18 
 
The proposal asserts that EPA has only identified “two categories of circumstances 
where compliance with the proposed rulemaking is most likely to necessitate new or 
revised WQS. . . .” See 87 FR 74371. First, for the development of human health criteria 
(HHC) that would incorporate the “unsuppressed fish consumption rate” and therefore 
be protective of subsistence fishers. And second, where a reserved right is not already 
accounted for as a designated use or presently attained. See 87 FR 74370-71. The 
effect on HHC development is discussed further in section IV. below.   
 
Concerning designated uses and attainment of uses, the proposal suggests that many 
states already protect tribal reserved rights through water quality standards that provide 
“protection and propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and provide[] for recreation in 
and on the water.” See 87 FR 74370. EPA also points to the existing requirement that 
states adopt water quality standards to protect designated uses and says, “where a tribe 
has the right to hunt an aquatic-dependent species, for example, the species may 
already be protected in accordance with this proposed rulemaking by a state’s ‘wildlife’ 
designated use and associated criteria, such that this rulemaking would not require any 
additional protection of that species beyond what is already required under the CWA 
and EPA’s existing WQS regulation.” See 87 FR 74370. This statement, which IACI 
believes accurately describes Idaho’s water quality standards (and likely most other 
state standards), calls into question the entire basis for the proposed rule.   
 
EPA then goes on to contradict these statements because, elsewhere in the proposal, 
the agency admits that “it may be a complex inquiry to determine if tribal reserved rights 
apply in waters subject to state WQS” but that EPA can help states “determine if there 
are reserved rights, and whether and how they should be applied in the WQS context.” 
See 87 FR 74367.As EPA has no expertise or authority to interpret federal 19th century 
treaty rights, how EPA is going to “help” states divine the intent of these treaties is never 
explained.   In other words, EPA has no idea what the substantive or geographic scope 
of reserved tribal rights is across the country, nor how such rights could be interpreted 
for purposes of establishing water quality standards. The agency’s attempt to downplay 
the significance of mandating that states establish water quality standards to protect an 
undefined set of tribal reserved rights to an undefined standard is disingenuous.  
 
The agency’s statements also presume that a tribe with reserved rights would agree 
that a state’s existing generic “wildlife” designated use would suffice to protect asserted 
reserved rights. The likelihood of disagreement escalates when, as the rule would 
require, states must protect an historic “unsuppressed” expression of a reserved right, 
for example to hunt undefined aquatic-dependent species that may have been more 
abundant in prior generations. This type of disagreement among sovereigns is likely 
play out in dozens of ways, over dozens of designated uses, in an untold number of 
watersheds across the country.1 EPA’s claim that it has the ability, let alone the 
 
1 EPA acknowledges this in its Economic Analysis (EA) where it explains that, while EPA does not expect 
tribes to incur any costs to implement the proposed rule, the agency does expect that tribes may “choose 
to incur costs, such as legal fees or costs to complete scientific studies to support their position on the 
scope and nature of their rights and/or water quality necessary to protect them.” EPA EA, November 
2022, 3.  

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  4 | 18 
 
expertise, to adjudicate such disputes is not credible, and is discussed further in 
sections IV. and V. below. EPA has failed to consider major aspects of the problem and 
the proposal is arbitrary and capricious and unlawful under the APA. 
 
 
B.  The proposal would broadly expand the federal government’s reach into state 
management of waters and other resources  
The elephant in the room is the agency’s unlawful failure to consider how this proposal 
would accelerate EPA’s ability to regulate and interfere with a state’s management of 
water quantity, flow, and other resources ignoring the clear directive from Congress that 
nothing in the CWA shall supersede, abrogate or impair states authority to allocate 
water quantity and water rights established by state law. See 33 USC Section 1251 (g). 
Water quantity and flow are aspects of water management that have long been within 
the exclusive jurisdiction of states, not the federal government. Disputes over water 
quantity and water rights in the western part of the country go back generations and 
there is no indication they will resolve any time soon. These longstanding disputes 
foreshadow the new water wars that will erupt from this proposal, if finalized. The 
proposed rule is arbitrary and capricious and not in accordance with the law. 
 
In one current example, the U.S. Solicitor General, on behalf of the U.S. Department of 
the Interior; Deb Haaland, Secretary of the Interior; the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation; 
and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, is seeking to overturn a decision that gives the Navajo 
Nation a breach of trust claim against the Federal government for its failure to provide 
sufficient water for the Navajo Nation to farm its reservation land. The Navajo Nation’s 
claims are based on implied tribal reserved rights that it argues guarantee a certain 
quantity of water along the Colorado River. State of Arizona, et al., v. Navajo Nation, et 
al.; Department of Interior et al. v. Navajo Nation, et al. (Nos. 21-1484 and 22-51). This 
case is set for oral argument before the U.S. Supreme Court on March 20, just two 
weeks after the public comment period closes on this proposed rule. A handful of states 
have filed amicus briefs in support of the Federal government’s position because, if the 
Navajo Nation’s claims are upheld, the quantity of water available and the existing water 
rights held by those states and citizens along the Colorado River will be curtailed. The 
United States made similar implied tribal reserved water rights claims on behalf of Idaho 
Tribes in the Snake River Basin Adjudication which were rejected by the state court. 
 
The Navajo Nation case is critically relevant because it begs the question: what would 
preclude a tribe from asserting a reserved right for a sufficient quantity of flow within a 
waterway and seeking protection of that right through a state water quality standard? A 
specific quantity of flow could serve a tribe’s reserved right to take a certain quantity or 
species of fish, hunt a large game animal that relies on certain species of fish, grow an 
aquatic-dependent crop such as wild rice, or provide sufficient drinking water to serve 
tribal needs. According to the proposal, these uses need not be currently attainable, and 
the tribe may not have engaged in these practices in decades or generations due to 
social changes like the need for traditional employment. See e.g., EPA Guidance for 
Conducting Fish Consumption Surveys (2016). The answer is, nothing in the proposal 
would preclude a tribe from making such claims, even on waters like the Colorado River 
that have longstanding water rights and related generational disputes. Yet, the proposal 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  5 | 18 
 
does not mention any of these potential implications of the rule, nor does it examine the 
impact of the proposal on sovereign states.  
 
As the Navajo Nation case demonstrates, these are not far-fetched outcomes from the 
proposal. If a tribe asserts an implied reserved right for fishing salmon, would EPA 
require a state to establish a designated use for “salmon fishing,” and require a specific 
seasonal or monthly flow rate? For an asserted reserved right to grow wild rice, would 
EPA require the state to establish a “wild rice” designated use over a wet area of land 
and require a certain quantity of water flow over that land to grow the crop? How would 
these flow- and quantity-based “water quality standards” interact with the longstanding 
prior appropriations framework for water rights? How would such standards affect long 
settled (or recently settled) claims for water rights, including in the west, south, Midwest, 
and eastern United States? If EPA failed to mandate certain flows or if a tribe disagreed 
with a flow volume that EPA mandates for an asserted reserved right, would that tribe 
initiate legal action arguing that that the state’s standards do not comply with the CWA, 
or worse that the state or EPA has breached its fiduciary duty to protect those reserved 
rights? EPA should also assume that other water users and rights holders, including 
other states, would be deeply involved in any process or dispute over quantity or flow 
requirements or diversions. 
 
 
C.  States and TAS tribes establish designated uses, not EPA 
The CWA requires states to adopt water quality standards, including designated uses, 
but the proposed rule would mandate states and “treatment as a state” (TAS) tribes to 
adopt specific designated uses. The CWA requires that state water quality standards 
“shall consist of the designated uses of the navigable waters involved and the water 
quality criteria for such waters based upon such uses” and they “shall be such as to 
protect the public health or welfare, enhance the quality of water.” 33. U.S.C. 
1313(c)(2)(A).  When establishing water quality standards, states are also required to 
consider their “use and value for public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, 
recreational purposes, and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and . . . their use 
and value for navigation.” Id. EPA’s regulations also provide, “[e]ach State must specify 
appropriate water uses to be achieved and protected.” 40 CFR 131.10(a). 
 
The proposed rule would replace this state and TAS tribe authority and discretion with a 
mandate from EPA to adopt a specific designated use for state or tribal waters absent 
any consideration as to whether such a use is attainable. Not only is this contrary to the 
discretion that the CWA provides to states and TAS tribes, but the proposed provision 
would create internal inconsistences in the Code of Federal Regulations. EPA has not 
identified any legal authority allowing it to mandate states to adopt certain designated 
uses, nor has the agency considered the resulting internal inconstancies in federal 
regulation making the proposed rule  arbitrary and capricious and not in accordance 
with law. 
 
 
 
 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  6 | 18 
 
 
IV.  Water Quality Standards are Expected to be Based on Science 
In most federal programs, including the water quality standards program, EPA prides 
itself on being a scientific institution, driven by the highest levels of scientific integrity to 
meet the Congressional charge of the various statutes it administers. Should this 
proposal be finalized as proposed, EPA’s administration of the water quality standards 
program would shift from an orientation of the hard sciences (e.g., chemistry, biology) to 
one driven by social sciences (e.g., anthropology, and cultural and historic 
investigation). This shift is not one Congress envisioned or authorized, and it would be 
inconsistent with other longstanding water quality standards regulations that EPA has 
not proposed to modify.  
 
A.  Scientific rigor is essential for setting water quality standards 
Neither the CWA nor EPA’s regulations define the terms “sound scientific rationale” or 
“scientifically defensible methods.” However, EPA has made clear that water quality 
standards are to be based on data and scientific information derived from the hard 
sciences, including chemistry and biology, with a focus on science, science policy, and 
risk management. See e.g., 2000 EPA Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality 
Criteria for the Protection of Human Health (2000 Methodology) (“When EPA speaks of 
science or scientific analysis, it is referring to the extraction of data from toxicological or 
exposure studies and surveys with a minimum of judgment being used to make 
inferences from the available evidence.”); 2002 Human Health Criteria 
Recommendations (“Water quality criteria developed under section 304(a) are based 
solely on data and scientific judgments on the relationship between pollutant 
concentrations and environmental and human health effects. Section 304(a) criteria do 
not reflect consideration of economic impacts or the technological feasibility of meeting 
the chemical concentrations in ambient water.”); 2015 Human Health Criteria 
Recommendations (“EPA’s recommended water quality criteria are scientifically derived 
numeric values that EPA determines will generally protect aquatic life or human health 
from the adverse effects of pollutants in ambient water.”). These documents 
demonstrate that the touchstone for water quality standards is science-based.  
 
Additionally, although not directly on point, CWA section 311 defines the term “best 
available science” to mean “science that (A) maximizes the quality, objectivity, and 
integrity of information, including statistical information; (B) uses peer-reviewed and 
publicly available data; and (C) clearly documents and communicates risks and 
uncertainties in the scientific basis for such projects.” Section 321(a)(27). An argument 
could be made that if Congress intended all CWA programs to adhere to this level of 
scientific rigor, it would have explicitly required it in the statute. The counterargument is, 
Congress was very clear in section 311 what it thought “best available science” means 
and, although it did not define this term elsewhere in the CWA, this definition should be 
a starting point for how EPA interprets similar words and phrases used in the CWA, and 
a starting point for understanding what EPA meant when it promulgated regulations 
requiring water quality standards be based on sound science and be scientifically 
defensible. To date, EPA’s regulations and other actions have been largely consistent 
with the definition of “best available science” in section 311. 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  7 | 18 
 
Here, EPA is proposing to incorporate into the CWA’s water quality standards program 
new requirements for which there are no objective science-based standards. If the 
proposed rule is finalized, there would be no clear federal minimum requirement for 
states to achieve. To be clear, states are currently welcome to develop water quality 
standards that are more stringent than federal standards, including to protect tribal 
uses, and in doing so can use less-robust science than the CWA would demand.   
 
B.   EPA’s concept of protecting tribal reserved right holders to the same risk 
level of the general population is flawed. 
For the first time in the 50 years since EPA has been implementing the CWA, the 
proposed rule would require states and TAS tribes to use a particular cancer risk rate. 
The proposal provides no technical or public health support for this change in law and 
policy, and provides no legal analysis or precedent showing that the CWA requires 
these changes. The proposal also does not explain how these major changes will affect 
water quality standards that states must establish making the proposed rule  arbitrary 
and capricious and unlawful under the APA. 
 
Historically, states have had discretion to establish cancer risk rates within a range that 
EPA and other federal agencies have determined to be protective of human health. See 
e.g., EPA Methodology (2000); 2015 HHC 304(a) criteria. Until this proposal, EPA’s 
longstanding recommendation has been that states and TAS tribes apply a 10-5 or 10-6 
risk rate for the general population, and they can apply a higher standard of 10-7, but 
states must ensure that smaller subpopulations are protected to rate no lower than 10-4. 
2000 Methodology.  
 
The  proposed rule  would require states and TAS tribes to set cancer risk rates for 
tribal subpopulations “to at least the same risk level as the general population of the 
state would have been protected…” See 87 FR 74369. In doing so, the proposal would 
strip states and TAS tribes of the discretion to make risk management and public health 
decisions. Additionally, when a small subpopulation is protected to 10-5 or 10-6, the 
general population would actually be protected to a rate of 10-7 or 10-8 or higher. These 
risk rates have largely been dismissed as unnecessarily protective, and EPA has never 
required the general population to be protected to these levels in any of the programs 
that EPA administers (i.e., air, water, waste). Notably, EPA has not provided any 
rationale to support the proposed mandate and has not made a determination that 
protection to 10-4 creates an unacceptable human health risk to subpopulations. EPA’s 
only justification for this change is the agency’s view that a tribe’s sovereign status 
requires that it be protected to the same degree as the general population. This 
justification is not sufficient under the APA and the proposed rule is arbitrary and 
capricious.   
 
EPA has not made a scientific, technical, public health, or legal finding that tribal 
subpopulations require a greater level of risk protection than afforded under EPA’s 
longstanding recommendations. EPA has not explained why it no longer believes that 
states and TAS tribes are capable of making risk-based decisions. EPA has also not 
explained why the CWA would require tribal subpopulations to be protected to a greater 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  8 | 18 
 
degree than other high consuming subpopulations like, for example, subsistence fishers 
of Asian descent or those of any descent in economically disadvantaged communities. 
EPA has not satisfied its obligations under the APA and the proposed rule is arbitrary 
and capricious.   
 
In this proposed rule there is a serious technical error in the failure to recognize that 
risks vary among different members of the population; we all eat different amounts and 
kinds of fish.  Faced with this variation, public health policy makers must make 
decisions about the level of protection afforded different segments of the population 
(i.e., the average member of the population, more highly exposed individuals, highly 
exposed subpopulations). EPA, up until this rulemaking, recognized this variation in 
potential risk and provided guidance on how to address it:   
 
“With AWQC derived for carcinogens based on a linear low-dose 
extrapolation, the Agency will publish recommended criteria values at a 
10-6 risk level. States and authorized Tribes can always choose a more 
stringent risk level, such as 10-7. USEPA also believes that criteria based 
on a 10-5 risk level are acceptable for the general population as long as 
States and authorized Tribes ensure that the risk to more highly exposed 
subgroups (sport fishers or subsistence fishers) does not exceed the 10-4 
level.”  
 
It is important to recognize that because risk varies across the general population, this 
has implications for what target risk goals can be achieved.  A common phrase heard 
these days in an environmental justice context is:  “equal protection” for everyone.  It is 
impossible for water quality criteria to provide equal protection for all of the population.  
Individual and subpopulation risk is much different than general population risk.  It is an 
incontrovertible fact that the more water a person drinks and the more fish a person 
consumes, the higher will be his or her exposure and lifetime risk.  For a given water 
quality criterion, each individual has a unique exposure and risk because each 
individual consumes different amounts of water and fish from waters regulated by the 
State over his or her lifetime.  As long as each chemical is regulated with a single state-
wide criterion, and that criterion is not zero, these risks can never be made equal across 
the population.   
 
To illustrate this, Figure 1 shows the risk distributions for the Idaho general population, 
Idaho anglers and two Idaho Indian tribes (the Nez Perce and the Shoshone Bannock) 
populations exposed to a hypothetical water quality criterion with a concentration equal 
to X g/L.  This figure demonstrates the relative positions of the risk distributions for 
these four populations.2  While all four risk distributions overlap to a large extent, the 
bulk of the general population has the lowest risk, followed by the angler population, 
Shoshone Bannock population, and Nez Perce population, respectively.  These relative 
 
2 The distributions were developed using the same inputs as the Idaho Department of Environmental 
Quality used to develop HHWQC with the exception that the fish consumption rate distributions for the 
Nez Perce and Shoshone Bannock tribes were adjusted using the results of the recall survey and not the 
FFQ. 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  9 | 18 
 
positions remain the same regardless of the concentration of the hypothetical water 
quality criterion to which the populations are exposed.  At concentrations equal to 0.01X 
g/L and 100X g/L of the hypothetical chemical, all four risk distributions shift 
downward by a factor of 100 or upward by a factor of 100, respectively.  However, 
regardless of whether the hypothetical criterion is increased or decreased, the risk 
distributions do not converge, and they never will.  Highly exposed populations will 
always have greater risks no matter how big or small the water quality criterion and no 
single water quality criterion can afford equal protection to everyone. 
 
 
 
 
 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  10 | 18 
 
Figure 1 
Variation in Risk 
 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  11 | 18 
 
 
From an implementation standpoint, EPA has also not provided any examples of how 
this risk level requirement could affect the stringency of water quality standards. 
Observers can readily determine that requiring a cancer risk rate that is orders of 
magnitude more protective will result in water quality standards that are orders of 
magnitude more stringent. EPA must explain that mandating that states promulgate 
extremely stringent water quality standards is likely to result in vast numbers of waters 
that do not meet the new stringent water quality standards. This means states and TAS 
tribes would be required to develop and implement TMDLs for hundreds of newly 
impaired waters and establish effluent discharge limits at levels that are likely too low to 
be detectible with standard laboratory testing methods. In short, the proposal could 
severely restrict or prohibit economic activity in large portions of a state TAS tribe’s 
territory. EPA must acknowledge this likely outcome and provide a scientific, technical, 
public health, and legal justification for the proposal and its failure to do so is unlawful 
and renders the proposed rule arbitrary and capricious. 
 
 
C.  There is no scientific or factual support for the fish consumption suppression 
concept 
In the proposed rule EPA would require states to protect an “unsuppressed” expression 
of reserved rights, including a historic or “heritage” rate of fish consumption. To the 
extent consumption is suppressed because of societal changes that have occurred 
since settlement, including the modern economy and the opportunity to purchase 
necessities, these considerations fall well outside of the CWA’s science-driven 
framework and would undermine the longstanding scientific basis of the water quality 
standards program. 
The concept of “suppression” is whether the levels of contamination in game fish 
“suppress” fish consumption rates.3  A similar concept is that historically subpopulations 
had higher fish consumption rates, but these “heritage rates” are no longer possible due 
to either “suppression” or lack of available fish.  The corollary is that by reducing 
contaminant levels in fish (via more stringent water quality standards) then 
“suppression” is decreased since more fish can be consumed safely and that improved 
water quality will result in more fish. There is no evidence in the administrative record to 
support such a connection.  The preamble points to one TAS tribe, the Spokane Tribe, 
that promulgated a human health criteria based on an “unsuppressed” fish consumption 
rate of 865 grams per day (g/day). Absent from the record is any evidence that setting 
the criteria at these low levels has had any impact on fish consumption by Tribal 
members on the Reservation or more importantly, as it relates to the proposed rule, 
somehow would protect a tribal reserved treaty right in state waters.    
 
To evaluate the concept of suppression, health-advisories for fish consumption in Idaho 
were reviewed (see Appendix A).    As described in Appendix A, there is one state-wide 
advisory for bass consumption and 22 water body-specific advisories for consumption of 
 
3 The assumption is that the contaminants present in the fish came from the contaminants present in the 
water. 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  12 | 18 
 
various other species.  All these advisories are based on mercury, with the exception of 
Lake Coeur d’Alene, which has advisories based on arsenic and lead in addition to 
mercury and East Mill Creek, which is based on selenium.  It does need to be noted, 
that most of the fish species that are listed in the fish advisory are non-native species 
and therefore are not “heritage” fish in Idaho. 
 
A fish consumption advisory is based on when concentrations of a contaminant exceed 
risk thresholds based on consuming monthly 8.5 meals (4 ounces uncooked per meal) 
of fish per month.  This equates to a fish consumption rate of 32 grams per day.  The 
risk threshold is adjusted for sensitive populations (children and pregnant women); this 
may reduce the fish consumption.  It should be noted, that as shown in Table 1 of 
Appendix A, for the general population more than 8.5 meals per month of fish can be 
eaten for most of the waters that have fish advisories.4  Thus, it is unlikely that fish 
contaminant concentrations have any measurable “suppression” effect on the 
consumption rates of Idaho game fish.   
 
What is the source of mercury that has resulted in these fish consumption advisories?  
The State of Idaho, after conducting a study examining mercury concentrations in Idaho 
fish and water, determined that atmospheric deposition was the source of the mercury.5  
Thus, making changes in Idaho’s water quality standards will not affect these sources 
and will not change state-wide mercury concentrations in bass and other fish species. 
 
There have been documents prepared to try to determine “heritage” or “suppression 
rates.”  A review of such information prepared for a State of Idaho water quality 
rulemaking from 2014-2016 (see Appendix B) shows that information in such 
documents has not gone through a rigorous scientific validation process (similar to the 
process that current fish consumption rate studies go through) and thus is too 
speculative and unreliable in setting water quality standards.  We note that EPA has 
published protocols for conducting fish surveys and for quantifying fish consumption 
rates around the United States.6  These studies represent the most current and best 
available methods for quantifying fish consumption rates in setting human heath criteria.  
The focus of these studies and methodologies is on obtaining objectively defensible fish 
consumption rates based on current and actual fish consumption.  Hypothetical fish 
consumption rates are not considered and therefore none of these studies rely upon 
suppression or heritage rates in quantifying fish consumption rates.   
 
Moreover, use of suppression rates or heritage rates to set water quality standards 
cannot be found anywhere in the Clean Water Act.  EPA in this proposed rulemaking, 
defines “ “heritage rate” as:7 
 
 
4 This is equivalent to 31 grams/day of fish. 
5 Essig.  DA.  2010.  Arsenic, Mercury, and Selenium in Fish Tissue and Water from Idaho’s Major Rivers:  
A Statewide Assessment.  Idaho Department of Environmental Quality. 
6 See e.g. Estimated Fish Consumption Rates for the U.S. Population and Sub-Population (NHANES 
2003-2010) (EPA 2014); Guidance for Conducting Fish and Wildlife Consumption Survey (EPA 1998).   
7 Federal Register.  2022.  Vol.87 (232) p.74,368 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  13 | 18 
 
“A heritage rate is the amount of fish consumed prior to non-Indigenous or 
modern sources of contamination and interference with the natural lifecycle 
of fish, in addition to changes in human society.   While it is often thought of 
as a historic rate, it can also be reflective of a current unsuppressed rate.” 
 
Similarly we are unaware of any accepted or best available methods to collect 
suppression rates that would warrant using such “data” in setting human health criteria. 
On the contrary, EPA has published national recommended human health criteria as 
well as methodologies for states to follow in quantifying fish consumption.  Additionally, 
there is no way to validate hypothetical suppression rates. 
 
It is clear that federal rules require that water quality criteria be based on “sound 
scientific rationale” before they can be approved by EPA.  40 CFR 131.11(a)(1).  As 
noted above use of suppression rates in setting human health criteria is not scientifically 
defensible and there are no peer reviewed methodologies that support reliance upon 
this type of information.  Accordingly we believe that reliance upon suppression rates in 
setting water quality criteria would not be based on “sound scientific rationale” and as 
such do not meet the requirements of the Clean Water Act. 
 
 
 
V.  The proposal creates significant federalism conflicts that EPA has not 
acknowledged or considered and implicates the “major question” doctrine 
EPA concludes that the rule “will not have substantial direct effects on the states, on the 
relationship between the national government and the states, or on the distribution of 
power and responsibilities among the various levels of government.” See 87 FR 74375.  
This proposed conclusion cannot be reasonably or objectively sustained. Additionally, 
as an executive agency, EPA has only those powers given to it by Congress, and there 
is no evidence that Congress intended EPA to have the expansive powers that are in 
this proposed rule.  Similar to the discussion on water quantity and water rights, EPA’s 
proposed rule ignores and violates another directive from Congress in the CWA that 
states retain primary responsibility in development and use of land an water resources. 
See 33 U.S.C. Section 1251(b). The proposed rule unlawfully takes that primary 
responsibility from the states and shifts it to EPA under the agency’s new found 
authority to interpret treaties and treaty rights.  Nothing under the CWA authorizes such 
a result.    
 
When Congress enacted the CWA, it sought to “restore and maintain the chemical, 
physical, and biological integrity of the Nation’s waters” and simultaneously “recognize, 
preserve, and protect the primary responsibilities and rights of states” to mitigate 
pollution and direct development of land and water resources. 33 USC 1251(a), (b). 
Indeed, the CWA is often referred to as a statute based on a cooperative federalism 
foundation that intends strong partnerships between “the States and the Federal 
Government.” See e.g., New York v. United States, 505 U.S. 144, 167 (1992), Arkansas 
v. Oklahoma, 503 U.S. 91, 101 (1992). The proposed rule would all but eliminate this 
cooperative federalism framework in favor of a system where states are subordinate 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  14 | 18 
 
sovereigns in service of tribal reserved rights, even where those reserved rights are 
implied and have not been established by a formal treaty or other act of Congress. This 
puts states in an untenable position that was not considered or envisioned by Congress 
when it enacted the CWA. 
  
As described in other sections, the CWA directs EPA to oversee the various regulatory 
and nonregulatory programs, but states are intended to be the primary administrators of 
these programs. EPA is supposed to establish the floor—the federal minimum 
requirements that the CWA demands and states are obligated to comply with this 
federal minimum, but may choose to enact more stringent programs. Tribes that obtain 
TAS status have the same CWA rights and responsibilities as states, including to 
establish and protect water quality standards. Contrary to this long-established 
framework, the proposed rule would for the first time put states in a parens patraie 
position over tribal human health and welfare. Not only is this unconventional and well 
outside the CWA framework, it would seem to elevate tribal interests over those of the 
state and even put states in the role of trustee over tribal resources, a role that is 
assigned to the Federal government. If the rule is finalized as proposed it would 
significantly disrupt the distribution of power and responsibilities among the various 
levels of government. 
 
The proposal would also establish EPA as the arbiter of disagreements between states 
and tribes. In other words, EPA will mediate and negotiate disputes between two 
sovereigns over major environmental policy and public health risk management 
decisions. Not only is there no evidence that Congress envisioned the CWA to be 
implemented in this manner, but EPA is not equipped or authorized to adjudicate such 
disagreements. Finalizing such a rule would significantly change the relationship 
between the national government and the states. 
 
Moreover, EPA has not considered the substantial and direct burdens this proposal 
would place squarely on states. If finalized, the rule would require states to research 
and identify all tribal reserved rights that exist within or across a state’s boundaries, 
evaluate whether those rights are currently protected and to what degree, undertake 
significant engagement with tribes to understand everything from historic fish 
consumption rates to historic hunting and agricultural rates, and then translate those 
rates into some actionable water quality standard. Information in EPA’s rulemaking 
docket demonstrates that EPA is not planning to do any of this legwork as part of this 
rulemaking process, leaving it to the states to undertake this significant new workload. 
See EPA-HQ-OQ-2021-0791-0024, email from EPA staff to Wyoming staff (“EPA is not 
aware of any kind of central repository identifying tribal reserved rights to aquatic or 
aquatic-dependent resources across the country, nor does EPA intend to gather this 
information as part of this rulemaking effort.  This means that while we know of some 
states where reserved rights issues have come up, we can’t be sure about all the 
locations where the potential rule may or may not be relevant.”). The proposed rule 
would impose significant new burdens on states to investigate tribal reserved rights and 
develop tools to determine an appropriate level of protection for those rights, including 
implied rights.  

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  15 | 18 
 
 
EPA’s proposed determination that this rule would not have any federalism implications 
is simply not credible. In addition, the proposal presents issues of great “economic and 
political significance” and there is no evidence in the CWA, the proposal, or the 
rulemaking docket that Congress granted EPA these authorities. W. Virginia v. Env't 
Prot. Agency, 213 L. Ed. 2d 896, 142 S. Ct. 2587 (2022). For all of the reasons detailed 
above, the proposed rule violates the APA and easily implicates the “major questions” 
doctrine.  
 
 
 
VI.  The proposal could unlawfully create an actionable trust obligation 
In enacting the CWA, Congress did not create a trust obligation or fiduciary duty for 
EPA to protect tribal water resources. El Paso Nat. Gas Co. v. United States, 750 F.3d 
863, 899 (D.C. Cir. 2014). Because the CWA itself does not set forth such an obligation 
or duty, EPA has no authority to impose such duties on itself or any other sovereign 
through rulemaking. Regardless of these constraints on its authority, EPA has proposed 
a rule that mandates all water quality standards established and approved by EPA or 
states “protect tribal reserved rights.” The proposal could be interpreted to unlawfully 
create an actionable trust obligation where none has been established by Congress. At 
a minimum, the proposed rule’s language would create an appearance of a trust 
obligation under the CWA, opening the federal government and delegated state 
authorities to potentially significant and prolonged litigation on a question that is easily 
answered under longstanding legal precedent. It is irresponsible for EPA to propose a 
regulation that could be construed to create trust obligations where it is plain that none 
exist. 
 
 
VII.  The proposal is inconsistent with court decisions on tribal treaties, fish and 
water quality. 
EPA’s proposed rulemaking predisposes (assumes) that tribal treaties8 provide these 
“tribal reserved rights” in relation to water quality and fish.  During a 2014-2016 water 
quality rulemaking in Idaho, there was an assertion by several stakeholders that tribes 
have a legally protected property interest associated with treaty right rights to take fish 
in usual and accustomed places, including the preservation of the physical condition of 
fish taken.  For example, in its January 16, 2015 letter to the Idaho Department of 
Environmental Quality (Idaho DEQ), the Columbia River InterTribal Fish Commission 
(CRITFC) stated, “Tribal rights to fish are guaranteed in treaties with the United States. 
CRITFC’s member tribes ceded roughly one-third of the Columbia Basin to the United 
States government, but forever retained the right to take fish from these waters.  Implicit 
in the treaty promises of 1855 was the understanding that the fish taken would be 
healthy and safe to eat” (emphasis added).  Additionally, the Nez Perce Tribe asserted 
that its treaty rights included “a legally protected property interest” covering both access 
to usual and customary places and the taking of fish destined for those places.  
 
8 EPA is taking a very, very broad interpretation of what is legally binding in regards to tribal treaties.  See 
Federal Register. 2022, Vol. 87 (232) p.74,363.   

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  16 | 18 
 
 
These representations are not supported by federal law interpreting the Nez Perce 
Tribe’s 1855 treaty rights concerning the right to fish (see Appendix C – which was 
prepared for the 2014-2016 rulemaking).  In Nez Perce Tribe v. Idaho Power Co., the 
court held that the Nez Perce Tribe “does not own the fish runs or the fish but rather, it 
owns a treaty right to take fish from its usual and customary Places as specified in the 
1855 treaty.”  Moreover, the Court found that “Indian tribes do not have an absolute 
right to the preservation of the fish runs in their original 1855 condition, free from all 
environmental damage caused by the migration of increasing numbers of settlers and 
the resulting development of land.”  The court went on to state that “the Tribe’s right to 
fish pursuant to the 1855 Stevens treaty only guarantees access to certain off-
reservation fishing grounds and the right to attempt to catch available fish….The 
Stevens treaties require that any development authorized by the states which injures 
the fish runs be non-discriminatory in nature, but does not however, guarantee that 
subsequent development will not diminish or eventually, and unfortunately, destroy the 
fish.”  The Court’s ruling is consistent with Blackfeet, etc. Nations or Tribes of Indians, in 
which the Court of Claims held that “the right to hunt the common grounds did not 
include ‘any terms guaranteeing to the Indians a maintenance of the status quo for 
almost a century.”  Therefore, representations that treaty rights implicitly include the 
right to take fish of a certain quantity or condition is not supported by Idaho law 
examining the question.  
 
Despite the lack of of judicial precedent to support the proposed rule, EPA erroneously 
relies upon U.S. v. Washington, 853 F.3d 946 (9th Cir. 2017) (“Culverts Case”) for its 
sweeping proposal.   The Culverts Case involved decades long litigation brought by 
many Northwest Tribes and later joined by the United States against the state of 
Washington seeking an injunction to force the state to remove or repair hundreds of 
culverts. After a lengthy trial, the court found that the culverts did reduce salmon runs 
and therefore impinged upon the tribes’ treaty rights to access their accustomed fishing 
grounds and earn a moderate living from salmon harvesting.  Based on this evidentiary 
record, the court directed the state to repair or replace the offending culverts over a 
lengthy time period.  The court however rejected the idea that the scope of injunctive 
relief should include a directive to generally improve the environment because any such 
sweeping directive needed to be based on “concrete facts” which were lacking in the 
decades-long litigation.   
 
As pointed out infra, there are no concrete facts in the record to support a connection 
between setting state water quality standards based on unsuppressed fish consumption 
rates or 19th century water quality conditions and providing tribes with access to their 
accustomed fishing grounds to earn a moderate living.  Contrary to EPA’s suggestions 
in the Preamble to the proposed rule, the Culverts Case, to the extent is applies at all, 
rescues EPA’s unlawful efforts in the proposed rule.     
 
 
 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  17 | 18 
 
VIII.  Summary 
This proposed rule dramatically impinges on states' rights to develop water quality 
standards as specifically reserved to the states by Congress in the Clean Water Act.  
The proposed rule now asserts that states must take into consideration tribal treaty 
rights outside of designated Reservations in setting state water quality standards. This 
is a substantial change to the Clean Water Act water quality standards program and is 
not based on any changes to the law.  Rather it is based on EPA''s attempt to interpret 
Tribal treaty rights (something the agency has no expertise in doing) to mandate such a 
result.  The Clean Water Act does envision a role for Tribes to set water quality 
standards within reservation boundaries under the treatment of state provisions of the 
Clean Water Act (and many tribes have taken advantage of these provisions).  
However, there is nothing in the Clean Water Act that mandates that tribes must be part 
of the state water quality standards setting process.  The EPA proposal clearly impinges 
on state sovereignty reserved to the states under the Clean Water Act.  
 
Additionally, the mandate in the proposed rule as to how states must set water quality 
standards for state waters based on implied tribal treaty rights is equally problematic.  
Rather than requiring states to look at current conditions of state waters in setting 
standards, the proposed Rule mandates that states must now consider (or speculate) 
what water quality conditions and aquatic resources in state waters were like when 
Tribal treaties were executed in the middle of the 19th Century and set the standards 
accordingly.  Such an approach is contrary to the scientific rigor required by the Clean 
Water Act.   This unprecedented requirement basically directs states to ignore 
development over the last 175 years and set water quality standards accordingly 
whether such standards are attainable or not.  Nothing in the Clean Water Act 
mandates such a result. If such a requirement becomes part of the state standard 
setting process, the impact on Idaho industries, businesses, and municipalities to 
economically operate within the law will be substantially affected.    
 
Finally, the proposed rule will uniquely impact the state of Idaho not only because of the 
number of tribal treaties that might impact be interpreted by EPA to require Idaho to 
follow the rule, but the state of Idaho went through a lengthy standard setting process 
between 2014-2019 that included Idaho undertaking a statewide fish consumption study 
to set water quality standards.  The state even took into consideration Idaho tribe's 
current fish consumption rates in setting the standards. Although EPA initially balked at 
approving these science-based standards for the same reasons articulated in the 
proposed Rule, EPA ultimately approved the standards in 2019.  The proposed Rule 
would clearly undo Idaho's efforts.  Additionally, the proposed Rule based on the 
premise that tribal treaty implies reserved rights to water quality in state waters outside 
Reservations could easily be applied to water quantity issues by suggesting that tribal 
treaties give tribes an implied reservation to water rights outside the Reservation.     
 
In closing the proposed Rule is a substantial overreach by EPA, to expand Tribal 
interests beyond anything Congress ever envisioned.  The proposed rule clearly 
violates the APA and the CWA. and should not go forward.   
 

Water Quality Standards and Tribal Reserved Rights:  Comments by IACI 
 
 
P a g e  18 | 18

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0205 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Department of Environmentar Quality 
To protect, conserve and enhance the quality of Wyoming's 
environment for the benefit of current and future generations. 
WYOMING 
Mark Gordon, Governor 
Todd Parfitt, Director 
March 2, 2023 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
Submitted online via https://www.regulations.gov 
Re: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
To Whom It May Concern, 
Pursuant to both the Federal Clean Water Act (CWA) and Wyoming Statutes, the Wyoming Department 
of Environmental Quality (WDEQ) is responsible for overseeing development and implementation of 
Wyoming's surface water quality standards. As such, WDEQ takes considerable interest in the 
Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) proposed revisions to the CWA water quality standards 
regulation at 40 CFR Part 131 to prescribe how water quality standards must protect aquatic and 
aquatic-dependent resources reserved to tribes through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other 
sources of Federal law. EPA's insufficient engagement with states and tribes has resulted in proposed 
regulations that fail to identify an implementable approach to ensure water quality standards protect 
applicable tribal reserved rights. In addition, the complexities and uncertainties associated with 
identifying and protecting applicable tribal reserved rights will easily overwhelm the already 
complicated and resource-intensive water quality standards revision process. This letter outlines the 
questions about legal authorities, the untenable proposed process for tribal consultation and EPA 
review, and the regulatory ambiguities associated with the proposed revisions that support these 
conclusions. 
The proposed revisions impose significant, unfunded, and largely undefined requirements on WDEQ, 
tribes, and EPA. WDEQ would be required to determine whether there are explicit or implicit tribal 
reserved rights associated with state waters, and if so, to establish water quality standards that would 
protect tribal reserved rights "unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-
dependent resource" and the health of the right holders "to at least the same risk level as provided to 
the general population of the state." WDEQ would also be required to submit to EPA information on the 
"scope, nature, and current and past use of reserved rights, as informed by the right holders." After 
consultation with tribes, EPA would use this information to determine whether surface water quality 
standards submitted by WDEQ sufficiently protect tribal reserved rights. If EPA determined that 
Wyoming's water quality standards failed to sufficiently protect tribal reserved rights, EPA would be 
required to disapprove and promulgate water quality standards for Wyoming. 
200 West 17th Street, Cheyenne, WY 82002 · http://deq.wyoming.gov · Fax (307)635-1784 
ADMIN/OUTREACH 
ABANDONED MINES 
AIR QUALITY 
INDUSTRIAL SITING 
LAND QUALITY 
SOLID & HAZ. WASTE 
WATER QUALITY 
(307) 777-7937 
(307) 777-6145 
(307) 777-7391 
(307) 777-7369 
(307) 777-7756 
(307) 777-7752 
(307) 777-7781 

Among WDEQ's primary concerns with the revisions is the fact that many of the potentially applicable 
tribal reserved rights have not yet been identified, quantified, defined, agreed to by states, tribes, and 
the Federal government, or otherwise fully determined by a court of competent jurisdiction. The CWA 
state surface water quality standards revision process cannot be used as a means to identify, quantify, 
define, negotiate, or litigate tribal reserved rights. Neither WDEQ nor EPA have authority to define the 
nature and extent of tribal reserved rights. In addition, the ability of right holders to exercise their rights 
are dependent on a multitude of factors that extend well beyond surface water quality protections. Both 
the reserved rights and these factors must be identified, defined, and negotiated or otherwise fully 
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction on a waterbody-specific basis prior to the development 
of surface water quality protections for such rights. lfthis critical step is absent, incorporating tribal 
reserved rights into state water quality standards will inevitably entangle the already complex standards 
revision process in arenas far outside its scope. Furthermore, the proposed requirements are much too 
ambiguous; the process for standards development, tribal consultation, and EPA review are 
problematic; and established methodologies to implement the revisions are lacking. 
Engagement with state coregulators, elected state and local leaders, and other stakeholders is critical to 
the development of implementable regulations. However, such engagement appears to have been 
minimal, and engagement with the WDEQ was almost non-existent despite our repeated feedback to 
EPA that it was imperative they engage with state coregulators. 
Given the lack of engagement with states, concerns about legal authorities, and the inability to clearly 
define regulatory requirements, the proposed revisions are premature at best. WDEQ recommends that 
EPA withdraw the proposed rule to address these concerns and conduct meaningful engagement with 
states, tribes, and other stakeholders. WDEQ further recommends that EPA consider whether tribal 
reserved rights are suitable for inclusion in the federal regulations, or whether addressing tribal 
reserved rights on a case-by-case basis through collaboration between tribes, states, and the Federal 
government would be a more productive course of action. Our detailed comments are provided below. 
1. The CWA Does Not Include the Requirement That Water Quality Standards Broadly Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights. Section 303(c) of the CWA identifies that whenever states revise or adopt water 
quality standards, "such standards shall be such as to protect the public health or welfare, enhance the 
quality of water and serve the purposes of this chapter. Such standards shall be established taking into 
consideration their use and value for public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, recreational 
purposes, and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes, and also taking into consideration their use 
and value for navigation." In addition, 40 CFR 131.12(a), requires "existing instream water uses and the 
level of water quality necessary to protect the existing uses" to "be maintained and protected." As such, 
states are already required to establish water quality standards that protect currently exercised tribal 
reserved rights. Likewise, 40 CFR § 131.21 already confers EPA authority to ensure that water quality 
standards meet the requirements of the CWA and regulations. Congress did not include within these 
requirements, or within the goals and objectives of the CWA, a specific directive that water quality 
standards broadly protect tribal reserved rights, including rights that may not currently be exercised and 
rights that may not be explicitly related to water quality. The lack of explicit authority in the CWA and 
the often undefined nature of tribal reserved rights will likely make Wyoming state water quality 
standards, developed to comply with the proposed revisions, vulnerable to legal challenges. 
2. Determining Tribal Reserved Rights Exceeds WDEQ's Authority. The proposed revisions would 
require the WDEQ to work with tribes to identify tribal reserved rights associated with "aquatic or 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
2 

aquatic dependent resources" held through "treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of 
Federal law" as part of the CWA surface water quality standards revision process. 
As acknowledged by EPA, tribal reserved rights are complicated and often require considerable 
deliberation, negotiation, or litigation. Rights may have been included in a treaty, treaties may not have 
been ratified, and rights may have been modified or not discussed in subsequent treaties. Rights may 
have been granted or limited in an Executive Order. Rights may have been granted or expressly 
abrogated by Congress. Reserved rights may be constrained by factors that both can and cannot be 
remedied. Rights may be implicit, vague, and ambiguous. Tribes may wish to exercise their reserved 
rights or not to exercise their reserved rights. Wyoming, like much of the United States, was historically 
home to a number of tribes that were party to treaties with the United States government. And while 
some of these treaties may reserve rights implicitly or otherwise, the nature and extent of many of 
these rights is currently unknown. 
The CWA surface water quality standards revision process is not an appropriate means to determine the 
nature and extent ofthese rights. The Wyoming Environmental Quality Act (EQA) charges WDEQ with 
preserving and exercising the primary responsibilities and rights of the state of Wyoming. Specific to 
water quality standards, the EQA authorizes WDEQ to develop standards to protect waters of the state. 
The EQA does not authorize WDEQ to determine the nature and extent of reserved rights, nor does it 
authorize WDEQ to relinquish responsibility for establishing water quality standards to EPA. Therefore, 
because tribal reserved rights associated with state waters in Wyoming have not been clearly defined 
and identified, the revisions attempt to force WDEQ into a situation where it has no authority to comply 
with the proposed revisions. 
3. Determining Tribal Reserved Rights Exceeds EPA's Authority. Under the proposed revisions, EPA 
would determine whether states have sufficiently identified and protected applicable tribal reserved 
rights after tribal consultation and based on information submitted by states on the "scope, nature, and 
current and past use of reserved rights, as informed by the right holders." If a state failed to comply, EPA 
would be required to promulgate water quality standards that protect applicable tribal reserved rights. 
Therefore, EPA would need to determine the potentially applicable tribal reserved rights when either 
acting on water quality standards submitted to EPA or when promulgating water quality standards. 
Although Section 511(a)(3) of the CWA outlines that the CWA should "not be construed as ... affecting or 
impairing the provisions of any treaty of the United States," the CWA does not authorize EPA to 
determine the nature and extent of tribal reserved rights; arbitrate, negotiate, or litigate reserved rights; 
or determine how a tribe may or may not exercise a reserved right. Determination of tribal reserved 
rights is governed directly by tribal-state negotiations, specific lines of authority found in U.S. Supreme 
Court case law, state-specific water adjudications, and other specifically binding sources of legal 
authority, not indirectly through unilateral agency rulemaking. As such, EPA should not assert such 
authorities in future discussions regarding tribal reserved rights. 
4. The Proposed Revisions Will Burden Wyoming's Surface Water Quality Standards Revision Process 
and Create Legal Vulnerabilities. If finalized, the proposed regulations would immediately require 
Wyoming to identify potentially applicable tribal reserved rights and establish water quality standards 
necessary to protect reserved rights. If Wyoming failed to do so, EPA would be required to promulgate 
such standards. If such protections were not included in Wyoming's water quality standards, both 
Wyoming and EPA would be out of compliance with the regulations and vulnerable to legal challenges. 
However, to sufficiently protect reserved rights, Wyoming (or EPA) may need to review and potentially 
update Wyoming's water quality criteria for aquatic life, wildlife, and consumption of aquatic life. 
Wyoming may also need to develop new or site-specific water quality criteria to protect reserved rights. 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
3 

This process is extremely complex, resource-intensive, and likely must be carefully negotiated, or 
litigated, between states, tribes, and the Federal government. The surface water quality standards 
revision process is already complicated, resource-intensive, and subject to delays. EPA already often fails 
to meet statutory deadlines, even without the complexity of addressing tribal reserved rights. 
5. Formal Consultation Must Occur Before States Initiate a Triennial Review, Water Quality Standards 
Developed Once Applicable Tribal Reserved Rights Have Been Agreed Upon. The proposed revisions 
require states to submit information to EPA "on the scope, nature, and current and past use of the tribal 
reserved rights, as informed by the right holders." In reviewing state water quality standards, EPA would 
be required to "initiate tribal consultation with the right holders ... in determining whether State water 
quality standards protect applicable reserved rights." The proposed process does not require EPA to 
formally consult with the tribes or provide feedback to Wyoming on reserved rights and the level of 
water quality necessary to support the reserved rights until after our water quality standards revision 
process has been completed. Although WDEQ could reach out to tribes early in the water quality 
standards revision process, some tribes prefer to only engage with the Federal government and may not 
engage directly with WDEQ. Therefore, by the time of formal consultation, WDEQ would have already 
invested significant resources to develop, revise, and adopt water quality standards. Partner agencies 
and stakeholders would have also invested significant resources into the process-the standards would 
have been through scoping and multiple public notices. The standards would have been reviewed by 
legal counsel and our Water and Water Advisory Board, adopted by the Environmental Quality Council, 
and approved by the governor. As such, the proposed process does not provide critical information early 
enough in the rule revision process, nor does it sufficiently recognize the resources Wyoming expends in 
revising water quality standards or the resources that Wyoming would need to expend if water quality 
standards are disapproved. WDEQ's previous efforts to engage EPA early in the rule revision have not 
prevented disapprovals, as EPA has not always been forthcoming about which revisions they view as 
problematic. 
Not only is the proposed process inefficient, the process is also unlikely to result in EPA and states being 
able to meet regulatory timeframes. Section 303(c) of the CWA requires states to review their water 
quality standards at least every three years and for EPA to review and approve submissions within 60 
days or disapprove submissions within 90 days. Federal guidance1 on tribal consultation directs federal 
agencies to provide tribes with 30 days written notice and a 30-day comment period, after which EPA 
must provide responses to the comments received. Therefore, as proposed, EPA would not have 
sufficient time to conduct the tribal consultation and approve state water quality standards submissions. 
Moreover, because tribal reserved rights and the levels of water quality sufficient to protect the rights 
are so complex, delays with the approval process appear inevitable. This makes states and EPA 
vulnerable to legal challenges. 
Further, 40 CFR § 131.3(1) defines "Indian Tribe or Tribe" as "any Indian Tribe, band, group, or 
community recognized by the Secretary of the Interior and exercising governmental authority over a 
Federal Indian reservation." Some tribes have clearly defined governance structures that can serve in an 
official capacity during the water quality standards revision process, but others do not. In circumstances 
where a tribe does not have a defined governance structure, a formal consultation process may not be 
possible. 
1 TTR BEST PRACTICES FLOWCHART {bia.gov) 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
4 

6. Insufficient Local and State Consultation Process, as Required in Executive Order 131322• In the 
federal register notice, EPA concludes that Executive Order 13132 does not apply to this action. 
Executive Order 13132 outlines that the Agency cannot promulgate rules with federalism 
implications,3 including those that pre-empt state and local laws, unless the agency provides all 
affected State and local officials notice and an opportunity for appropriate participation in the 
proceedings. As part of evaluating whether surface water quality standards sufficiently protect 
tribal reserved rights, the proposed revisions grant EPA the authority to determine the scope, 
nature, and extent of tribal reserved rights. The ability of a tribal member to exercise their reserved 
rights associated with aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources undoubtedly requires 
consideration of state and local laws, particularly as they relate to access, allocation of water, and 
fish and wildlife conservation and management. As such, the proposed revisions have the potential 
to conflict with state and local laws and authorities. 
EPA described in the preamble that they provided a conceptual overview of the draft regulations for the 
Association of Clean Water Administrators (ACWA) Monitoring, Standards and Assessment 
Subcommittee and held three additional one-on-one meetings with individual states upon request. EPA 
did not describe any additional consultation with elected state and local officials, nor is WDEQ aware of 
any efforts made by EPA to engage beyond water quality management agencies. Due to the potential 
implications of the proposed revisions to local and state laws, EPA is required under Executive Order 
13132 to consult with state and local officials as part of the regulation revision process. 
7. Insufficient State Consultation Process in Developing the Proposed Revisions. The preamble states 
that the core of the water quality standards regulation was established in 1983 and that EPA has revised 
the regulations only three times since 1983. The preamble further describes that the EPA's state 
consultation process consisted of providing a conceptual overview of the draft regulations for the 
ACWA's Monitoring, Standards and Assessment Subcommittee and holding three additional one-on-one 
meetings with individual states upon request. WDEQ requested additional outreach and engagement on 
the proposed revisions on multiple occasions; however, these requests were not honored by EPA. 
Given that states have the primary responsibility for developing surface water quality standards, 
WDEQ/WQD is alarmed by EPA's lack of engagement with states during development ofthe proposed 
revisions. The fact that the proposed revisions impose new, significant, and far-reaching requirements 
on states that may conflict with other state laws and authorities emphasizes that engagement with 
states is critical. ACWA and the Environmental Council of States are important national organizations 
that represent states. However, these organization do not represent all states, and engagement with 
these organizations should be in addition to, not instead of, engagement with individual states. 
In addition, EPA never addressed questions that states posed through ACWA. For example, EPA relayed 
during one of these discussions that hundreds of reserved rights exist, but EPA never provided individual 
states with information about where the rights may be applicable so that states could have this 
invaluable context when reviewing the proposed revisions. 
Since cooperative federalism is essential to successful development and implementation of water 
quality standards under the CWA, states must be more thoroughly integrated into the regulation 
2 Executive Order 13132, Federalism: https://www.govlnfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1999-08-10/pdf/99-20729.pdf 
3 Federalism implications are defined as having substantial direct effects on states or local governments (individually or 
collectively), on the relationship between the national government and the states, or on the distribution of power and 
responsibilities among the various levels of government. 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
5 

development and revision process. EPA should have provided states and tribes with early engagement 
opportunities in order to provide meaningful feedback to inform the regulation revision process. WDEQ 
recommends EPA initiate a meaningful collaborative cooperative federalism and nation-to-nation 
consultation process with states and tribes collectively. 
8. The Proposed Revisions Lack Clarity Regarding Aquatic and Aquatic-Dependent Resources. The 
proposed revisions require states to protect tribal reserved rights "to the extent supported by available 
data and information," associated with "aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources that are either 
reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly." The proposed revisions do not further define 
these terms, nor do they limit the proposed revisions to those reserved rights directly dependent on 
surface water quality. The proposed revisions do not consider the existing body of directly applicable 
case law specifically addressing treaty rights (e.g., hunting, fishing, gathering). Since many tribal 
reserved rights may be broad and these broad rights may depend to some extent on surface water 
quality, the proposed revisions have the potential to greatly expand the factors that must be considered 
during development of surface water quality protections. As a result, WDEQ would need to expend 
considerable resources determining and negotiating whether a particular reserved right would require 
water quality protections. WDEQ would then need to expend considerable resources determining and 
negotiating the levels of water quality necessary to protect the reserved right. Therefore, despite the 
limitation that the protections be based on "available data and information," the proposed regulations 
do not provide sufficient clarity to avoid protracted negotiations and legal liabilities regarding which 
reserved rights require protections under the proposed rule. 
9. The Proposed Revisions Lacks Clarity Regarding Tribal Reserved Rights "Unsuppressed by Water 
Quality and Availability." The proposed revisions require water quality standards to "the extent 
supported by available data and information" to protect "the exercise of tribal reserved rights 
unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource." However, 
the proposed revisions do not further define these considerations. Determining whether a reserved 
right is suppressed via water quality versus some other direct or indirect factor is complex and resource 
intensive, particularly on the scale that may be necessary to protect reserved rights. For example, fishing 
rights are affected by population management, which may be limited due to surface water quality as 
well as habitat degradation, invasive species, disease, and a number of other factors. And although EPA 
has offered resources to assist states, "available data and information" is subject to interpretation and 
EPA's resources to assist states are limited. Therefore, the proposed regulations do not provide 
sufficient clarity to avoid protracted negotiations and legal liabilities regarding the level of water quality 
necessary to protect potentially applicable tribal reserved rights. 
10. Neither EPA nor States Have Water Quality Criteria or Methodologies to Derive Water Quality 
Criteria to Protect the Potentially Applicable Tribal Reserved Rights. Development of water quality 
standards to protect tribal reserved rights may require the establishment of designated uses and water 
quality criteria that have not been contemplated under either Wyoming's surface water quality 
standards or EPA's nationally recommended water quality criteria. The potential breadth of tribal 
reserved rights contemplated under the proposed revisions may require derivation of water quality 
criteria for which there are currently no agreed-upon methodologies. The potentially applicable 
reserved rights must be identified and methodologies must be developed, agreed upon, and finalized 
prior to imposing requirements to protect such uses. 
11. The Proposed Revisions Do Not Provide Sufficient Flexibility to Not Include Tribal Reserved Rights 
or for Tribes to Decline Consultation When Appropriate. The proposed revisions require the 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
6 

identification and protection of tribal reserved rights, as informed by the right holders, and require EPA 
to consult with tribes. The proposed revisions do not explicitly provide a means for tribes to decline 
protections associated with a reserved right or for a tribe to decline consultation. There are likely a 
number of factors that will influence tribes' interest in protecting reserved rights and consulting with 
EPA. The proposed revisions should be revised accordingly so that states do not face legal challenges 
when reserved rights are not included in surface water quality standards. 
12. The Proposed Revisions Lack Clarity Regarding Quantities of Water. Although 40 CFR § 131.4 
describes "Consistent with section 101(g) and 518(a) of the CWA, water quality standards shall not be 
construed to supersede or abrogate rights to quantities of water," the federal register notice states that 
"Tribal reserved rights as defined in this proposed rule making generally do not address the 
quantification of Winters rights" that reserve sufficient water to accomplish the purposes of a 
reservation4• WDEQ is concerned with EPA's unwillingness to definitively say that the proposed revisions 
will not interfere with the allocation of Winters rights, despite (1) the fact that most of the reserved 
rights contemplated under the proposed revisions are likely to be associated with off-reservation waters 
and (2) both the CWA and the federal regulations include explicit statements that water quality 
standards are not to supersede or abrogate rights to quantities of water. Since the topic of water rights 
extends well beyond WDEQ's, EPA's, and CWA authorities, discussions regarding water quality 
protections associated with tribal reserved rights must explicitly exclude any determination, 
quantification, or definition of federal reserved water rights. 
13. Water Quality Standards Protective of Tribal Reserved Rights Must Recognize Limitations. Since 
many tribal reserved rights are broad (e.g., hunting, fishing, gathering) and therefore dependent on a 
number of factors outside the scope of water quality standards, there are likely a number of instances 
where tribal reserved rights are no longer supported or attainable. Efforts by states to develop water 
quality standards to protect tribal reserved rights must recognize these limitations without requiring 
states to conduct use attainability analyses, discharger-specific variances, or other in-depth and 
resource-intensive evaluations. Without this allowance, the extensive nature of reserved rights and the 
multitude of factors that influence reserved rights place an unreasonable burden on states. 
WDEQ appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the proposed revisions. Given WDEQ's 
extensive concerns with the proposed regulations, WDEQ recommends EPA withdraw the proposed rule 
and conduct meaningful engagement with states and tribes. To this end, WDEQ is ready to engage 
further with EPA and tribes on this important issue. Please contact Lindsay Patterson, Surface Water 
Quality Standards Supervisor, at 307-777-7079 or Lindsay.Patterson@wyo.gov, should you have any 
questions regarding these comments. 
Sincerely, 
Todd Parfitt, Director 
4 Footnote 6 of the proposed describes that "Under Winters v. United States and its progency, the establishment of 
a Federal reservation (Indian or otherwise) implicitly reserves sufficient water to accomplish the purposes of the 
reservation 207 U.S. 564, 576 (1908); Cappaert v. United States, 426 U.S. 128, 139 (1976); Arizona v. California, 373 
U.S. 546, 597-602 (1963). 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
7 

cc: 
Jennifer Zygmunt, Water Quality Division Administrator 
David Waterstreet, Watershed Protection Section Manager 
Chris Brown, Attorney General's Office 
Kit Wendtland, Office of the Governor 
Nolan Rap, Office of the Governor 
Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
8

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0170 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Other uses:
USEPA requested comment on whether there are additional types of tribal reserved rights that should 
be considered, apart from the rights to fish, gather aquatic plants, and to hunt for aquatic-dependent 
animals. Are the rights listed below applicable to be considered? 

The right to perform ceremonies in/on the water, which might involve significant ingestion risk

The right to farm and harvest plants in/on the water (e.g. wild rice)
Historic information:
When determining the level of water quality necessary to protect heritage designated uses, the rule 
proposal mandates that states and USEPA should consider historic information. Apart from scientific use 
surveys and peer-reviewed literature that document historic and current uses, can oral history provided 
by tribes during consultation be considered as an information source for states and USEPA? Oral history 
on historic uses, historic consumptive rates, and key aquatic and aquatic-dependent species represents 
traditional ecological knowledge that must not be undervalued when gathering information.
In the proposed rule, USEPA states that coordination and collaboration processes are necessary for the 
rulemaking to help reach the goal of protecting tribal reserved rights. USEPA also recognizes that tribes 
will have a “different set of values and relationships with the resources, which may be different world 
views from those of the surrounding community, and from state and local governments.” USEPA also 
stated that successful implementation of the proposed rulemaking therefore necessitates “close 
coordination with tribes and a greater understanding of the unique approaches that tribes may have 
toward managing their resources.” One such unique approach that tribes use to protect resources is 
passing down traditional ecological knowledge through oral history. Recognizing the validity of oral 
history will be key to implementing this rulemaking and fostering better collaboration between state 
and tribal governments.
When states are required to submit “information about the scope, nature, and current and past use of 
the tribal reserved rights, as informed by the right holders”, may the submittal of a transcript of 
consultation with tribal members be considered as one of many appropriate materials?

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0267 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Post Office Box 969 | Snoqualmie, WA 98065 | P: 425.888.6551 | www.snoqualmietribe.us | Page 1 of 4 
March 06, 2023 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center, Office of Water Docket 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
Submitted through the Federal eRulemaking Portal 
RE: 
Snoqualmie Indian Tribe’s Comments on Proposed Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-
2021-0791 
Dear Office of Water: 
The Snoqualmie Indian Tribe (“Tribe”) is a federally recognized sovereign Indian tribe, and 
a signatory to the Treaty of Point Elliott of 1855 in which it reserved to itself certain rights 
and privileges and ceded certain lands to the United States. Treaty of Point Elliot, art. V, 12 
Stat. 928. The Tribe submits these comments on the EPA’s proposed water quality 
standards regulatory revisions to protect Tribal Reserved Rights.  
The Tribe supports the EPA’s desire to change the water quality standards (WQS) 
regulations to explicitly and sustainably protect tribal reserved rights in state waters, 
consistent with existing legal obligations.  However, the Tribe does not support the 
proposed revisions in their current state, as they do not truly protect tribal rights other 
than those codified explicitly through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources 
of Federal law.  
EPA Should Recognize Tribes’ Sovereign Inherent Rights Along With Treaty Rights 
To truly protect tribal reserved rights in waters, the EPA needs to take a holistic approach. 
The protection of tribal reserved rights must be based on tribal sovereign inherent rights, 
as all tribes in what is now the USA have fished, hunted, and gathered in and near waters 
subject to the WQS since time immemorial, which is true regardless of alleged treaty status. 
Limiting the proposed protections solely to so called “treaty tribes” may have the effect of 
pitting tribes against one another. The WQS revisions also disregard a plurality of unlisted 
but nonetheless critical cultural and natural resources that are intrinsic to tribal life and 
that are of deep cultural, economic, and subsistence importance to the tribes.  

Post Office Box 969 | Snoqualmie, WA 98065 | P: 425.888.6551 | www.snoqualmietribe.us | Page 2 of 4 
The absence of a documented tribal right does not make it any less culturally significant or 
less worthy of protection. The Snoqualmie Tribe’s authority to manage and protect water 
resources on Snoqualmie Tribal lands stems from its sovereign status and inherent rights. 
The Tribe has adopted a Constitution to organize its traditional governmental structure. 
Section 4 of the Tribe’s Constitution provides that the jurisdiction and governmental power 
of the Snoqualmie Indian Tribe extends to all persons, property, lands, both running 
waters, and lakes, airspace, all natural resources, both living and dead; all activities 
occurring within the exterior boundaries of the Snoqualmie Indian Reservation or lands 
now or hereafter held in trust by the federal government for the Tribe or any member of 
the Tribe, so long as those lands are not within the boundaries of the reservation of another 
tribe.  
The Tribe’s sovereign inherent authority to assert jurisdiction over Tribal water resources 
is bolstered by the federal government’s explicit consent in the Clean Water Act for an 
Indian Tribe to be treated as a state for purposes of implementing the provisions of the 
Act.  33 U.S.C. § 1377 (e). The Snoqualmie Tribe already has been approved for Treatment 
as a State for Sec 106 and 319 funding, and when capacity allows, the Tribe may pursue the 
adoption of Tribal WQS establishing the Tribe’s own beneficial uses of water and its criteria 
to protect human health. 
Rather than limiting the proposed protections to tribal rights in state waters under federal 
law, the EPA should further acknowledge and defend a Tribe’s own definition of reserved 
resources on tribal lands. The Snoqualmie Tribal waters are not limited to the waters on 
the Reservation. Tribal waters include all the waters in the Tribe's historical homelands, 
those covered by treaties, and those that affect its cultural lifeways. 
Additionally, it would be beneficial for the EPA to acknowledge and protect reserved treaty 
rights within a Tribe’s usual and accustomed areas. The Snoqualmie 1 expressly reserved in 
the 1855 Treaty of Point Elliot, the “right of taking fish at usual and accustomed grounds and 
stations” and the “privilege of hunting and gathering roots and berries on open and 
unclaimed lands” off-reservation. Congress ratified the Treaty in 1859, and Congress has 
never abrogated the rights Snoqualmie reserved under the Treaty. The Tribe has engaged in 
the fishing, hunting and gathering activities it reserved under the Treaty throughout its 
aboriginal homelands in Washington since time immemorial.  These lands were ceded in 
exchange for treaty rights and the tribal waters on and off the reservation are protected by 
these treaty rights. 
1 12 Stat. 927 (1855). 

 
Post Office Box 969 | Snoqualmie, WA 98065 | P: 425.888.6551 | www.snoqualmietribe.us | Page 3 of 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EPA Should Extend the WQS Protections to All Tribes, Not Just Treaty Signatories 
 
Although Snoqualmie would benefit from the proposed change to the WQS regulations as a 
treaty signatory and irrespective of its position as a Treaty signatory, the Tribe recommends 
the EPA not limit the proposed changes to the WQS regulations only to those rights reserved 
by a tribe in a treaty or equivalent document.  This is unfair to those tribes who, by virtue of 
the failure of Congress to act or other historical anomaly, do not have a ratified treaty with 
the United States. Rather, all federally-recognized tribes, based on their sovereign status and 
inherent rights, should have the benefit of the full suite of resource protections contemplated 
by the EPA. This broader rule would recognize that tribes have fished, hunted and gathered 
in and around waters since time immemorial. This policy would be clear and fair. 
 
All federally-recognized tribes, and their members, should enjoy the same WQS protections 
for reserved rights. After all, treaties between the United States and Indian tribes reserved 
rights that those tribes already possessed—in other words, treaties are not a grant of rights 
from the United States to tribes.2  The Snoqualmie people have fished in watersheds of the 
Puget Sound since time immemorial, and were well-known “land hunters” who “were rated 
as one of the better hunting tribes” that “wandered and roamed through the Cascade 
Mountains on hunting expeditions,” as they “relied on hunting for a large part of their 
subsistence.”3 Thus, when the Snoqualmie signed the Treaty, they reserved fishing, hunting 
and gathering rights they already possessed for themselves and all of their descendants—
the same hunting and gathering right other Washington tribes had likewise exercised in their 
tribal homelands since time immemorial prior to the 1853 arrival of Governor Isaac Stevens 
in the Washington Territory.  
 
The EPA should therefore recognize the inherent fishing, hunting and gathering rights that 
all tribes have exercised since time immemorial, and fully protect the integrity of the waters 
that support those rights. The EPA should not further punish tribes whose ancestors did not 
have the opportunity to sign a treaty, refused to sign unfair treaties or whose treaties were 
not ratified by the Congress, by failing to protect those tribes’ inherent rights in regulatory 
changes to WQS.   
 
 
 
 
 
                                                        
2 See United States v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371 (1905) (a treaty “is not a grant of rights to the Indians, but a grant of 
rights from them.”) 
3 Snoqualmie Tribe of Indians ex rel. v. United States, 372 F.2d 951, 962-63 (Ct. Cl. 1967). 

Post Office Box 969 | Snoqualmie, WA 98065 | P: 425.888.6551 | www.snoqualmietribe.us | Page 4 of 4 
In conclusion, the Tribe welcomes the EPA’s proposal to change the WQS regulations to 
explicitly and sustainably protect Tribal reserved rights in state waters. The Tribe urges the 
EPA to take a more holistic approach, extending WQS protections to the fishing, hunting and 
gathering activities of all federally recognized tribes, regardless of alleged treaty or executive 
order status. The Tribe appreciates the opportunity to submit comments on this important 
issue. 
Sincerely, 
Christopher Castleberry, Tribal Treasurer 
Acting Chairman of Snoqualmie Tribal Council

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0177 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
1410 N Hilton Street 
Boise, ID 83706 • (208) 373-0502 
Brad Little, Governor 
Jess Byrne, Director 
February 24, 2023 
EPA Docket Center 
Sara Hisel McCoy 
Director, Standards and Health Protection Division 
Office of Water, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460 
Subject: Comments Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0001, Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Dear Director: 
Thank you for the opportunity to review and provide comments to the proposed rule on Water Quality 
Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (TRR), dated December 4, 2022.  As a 
co-regulator and delegated state, Idaho Department of Environmental Quality (IDEQ) has a keen interest 
in this rule and its potential to impact the majority of the state’s waters.  
IDEQ is first requesting that the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) provide at least a 60-day 
extension of the public comment period.  This proposed rule has broad economic and regulatory impact 
on the citizens of Idaho, and IDEQ is requesting additional time to clearly understand these impacts to 
provide further constructive comments.  However, IDEQ has identified and highlighted our initial 
concerns below. 
In section IV.E of the proposed rule revision, “EPA has concluded that this action does not have 
federalism implications.” Also stating that “it will not have substantial direct effects on the states, on the 
relationship between the national government and the states, or on the distribution of power and 
responsibilities among the various levels of government.”  IDEQ disagrees with this conclusion and 
believes it is in direct conflict with Executive Order 131321.  This rule proposes the ability of EPA to 
override IDEQ state negotiated and approved water quality standards.    
IDEQ has undertaken several lengthy and involved updates to our water quality standards recently, to 
include updates to our human health criteria (via a revision to our fish consumption rate), bacteria, and 
arsenic. These efforts took at least 2 years and up to 5 years to complete, were exhaustive of limited 
state resources ($100,000 to $750,000 of state general funds), and required significant staff time (2-5 
FTEs per year). Adding the federal responsibility of identifying tribal reserved rights, conducting federally 
required consultation, and re-doing all these actions without sufficient time to plan or budget for them, 
would magnify the burden to an already overburdened program. As EPA is lagging in their responsibility 
to keep CWA §304(a) recommended criteria up to date and with the ever increasing number of 
1 Title 3, Executive Order 13132, August 4, 1999, Federalism. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1999-08-
10/pdf/99-20729.pdf  

February 2023 
 
Page 2 of 4 
 
contaminants of emerging concern, state water quality standards programs are being adversely 
affected. 
EPA failed to comprehensively consult with States on possible approaches or the background in creating 
the rule prior to the draft release.  A substantial change such as this proposal, that could potentially 
impact the entire state of Idaho, should have included an inclusive consultation with state agencies, 
including IDEQ, prior to and during the drafting of the rule. In addition to these concerns, IDEQ would 
like to highlight the following that IDEQ believes needs to be addressed prior to the finalization of the 
rule.  
IDEQ’s water quality program works to protect the health of all residents dependent on the state’s 
aquatic resources, including Tribal members.  Any new or ongoing state rulemaking, to include our 
triennial review process, is conducted through an open process in which the Tribes and EPA are 
included, and their contribution is valued.  This revision proposes that during the Triennial review 
process that states “provide an opportunity for tribal right holders to engage and provide information 
the state can use in this evaluation.”  This is something IDEQ has historically done. 
I. 
Federal obligation to clarify treaty rights. 
Under the proposed rule, EPA defines tribal reserved rights as “any rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-
dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, 
executive orders, or other sources of Federal law.” However, despite the federal nature of these 
agreements, and the variety of sources from which tribal reserved rights may be determined, EPA is 
putting the burden of establishing the extent of these reserved rights on the states. As part of a 
November 2021 Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) regarding Tribal Treaty Reserved Rights2, 17 
participating agencies, including the EPA, agreed to “support the creation, integration, and use of a 
searchable and indexed database of all treaties between the United States government and tribal 
nations, to facilitate compliance with our treaty obligations...” The establishment of such a database 
would certainly make querying EPA on tribal reserved rights a much simpler and streamlined process. 
IDEQ supports, at a minimum, the fulfillment of this MOU obligation as a precursor to the finalization of 
the tribal reserved rights rule.  
The MOU also outlines how these federal agencies will strengthen consultation policies to give clear 
guidance on the duties and responsibilities of the parties to incorporate tribal treaty and reserved rights 
in their decision-making process, improve consultation, and develop best practices.  Indeed, many of the 
obligations set out in the MOU complement the goals of the tribal reserved rights rule; however, not 
enough time has elapsed since the signing of the MOU for many of these precursory obligations to be 
fulfilled at the federal level, which would establish a clearer path forward for the application of the 
proposed rule for the states.   
Requiring states to research, evaluate, and initiate consultation directly with all the tribes that claim 
reserved treaty rights in our state would significantly increase the workload to an already taxed staff. In 
Idaho, five tribal nations reside within the state, each claiming various fishing rights under divergent 
treaties and executive orders.  Three of the five tribes have “treatment of state” while two do not.  The 
October 2021 Summary Report3 of Tribal Consultation for the Proposed Rule, several tribes responded 
 
2 Memorandum of Understanding Regarding Interagency Coordination and Collaboration for the Protection of 
Tribal Treaty Rights and Reserved Rights, November 2021, https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/interagency-
mou-protecting-tribal-treaty-and-reserved-rights-11-15-2021.pdf 
3 Summary Report of Tribal Consultation for the Proposed Rule: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to 
Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, EPA, October 2021 

February 2023 
 
Page 3 of 4 
 
with a similar concern stating, “EPA cannot delegate its trust responsibility to consult with tribes and 
protect tribal reserved rights to states, noting that tribes’ government-to-government relationship is with 
the federal government rather than states.”   
This rule, as it’s currently written, shifts the regulatory burden of implementing existing EPA 
responsibilities to states —likely to the detriment of tribe-state relationships.  In addition, during the 
negotiated rule making process, if one of the five tribes chooses not to engage with the state, it is 
unclear how IDEQ would be able to submit the rule in confidence that it has met the full tribal 
consultation requirement. According to the proposed rule section V.C.1, “In order to ensure that tribes 
with reserved rights are engaged in the process of determining whether reserved rights apply, proposed 
40 CFR 131.6(g)(1) would require that WQS submissions to EPA include information about tribal 
reserved rights “as informed by the right holders,” where applicable” rather than “made opportunities 
for right holders to inform”. 
 
II. 
Undo financial burden. 
As part of the proposed rule, EPA prepared an Economic Analysis4 to inform the public of potential costs 
and benefits of this proposed rulemaking, including the estimate the potential administrative burden 
and costs to state governments.  IDEQ disagrees with section 2.4 Estimated Burden and Cost to States. 
The amount of labor hours is very difficult to quantify, and for a state that is already overburdened, 
quantifying the task of revising water quality standards for both human health and aquatic life is 
insurmountable.  The time it would take to complete consultation with disparate tribal governments, in 
addition to the already lengthy time devoted to open and transparent negotiations of rule language, 
would detract from IDEQ’s ability to protect water quality and ensure compliance with the current water 
quality rules. 
The burden to the regulated community is not accounted for in this analysis, “EPA could not predict 
requirements that could ultimately be imposed on NPDES permittees and nonpoint sources”. If IDEQ 
were to undergo negotiated rule making and end in a substantive change to criteria, our over 1,400 
current permits and hundreds of new permits issued through our Idaho Pollution Discharge Elimination 
System (IPDES) would require updates, and the permitted facilities would need to upgrade their 
wastewater treatment controls in order to comply with new or revised limits.  In addition, the greatest 
burden of facility upgrades would hit the hardest the in Idaho’s most vulnerable communities that do 
not have the means or ability to implement upgrades. The Economic Analysis5 states that for the 
regulated community “…it is not clear whether or to what extent this proposed rule would impose 
additional costs beyond those incurred in complying with current requirements.” 
III. 
Clarity on implementation. 
In the proposed rule EPA states that one of the objectives of the proposed revision is to create a uniform 
approach to the establishment of water quality standards for tribal reserved rights, but then goes on to 
lay out several ways in which the standards can be site specific.  The proposed rule language is broad, 
ambiguous, and difficult to apply. 
 
4 Economic Analysis for Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (Proposed 
Rule), EPA, November 2022  
5 Economic Analysis for Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (Proposed 
Rule), EPA, November 2022  

February 2023 
 
Page 4 of 4 
 
The proposal explains that the unsuppressed analysis “should balance heritage use of a resource with 
what is currently reasonably achievable for a particular waterbody” but provides very little detail on 
how “reasonably achievable” would be determined.  Waterways within Idaho are impacted by over 
1,178 dams6, both within and downstream of state borders, that produce a substantial amount of power 
and have altered the ecosystem to the point it would not be economically feasible to restore the 
ecosystem to pre-altered pre-dam conditions.  
In Idaho, as in several western states, tribal reserved rights for a particular water resource may span 
state boundaries and with conflicting information, gaps in science, or professional opinions as to how 
and to what level to protect the reserved right, it remains unclear how this conflict would be resolved.  
IDEQ requests clarification on EPA responsibility as the trustee for resolving conflicts through 
consultation and the expected processes or timelines.   
IDEQ has spent years developing site specific criteria for some constituents, through the stakeholder 
negotiation process, along with significant expense and research.  It is unclear how or if these site-
specific areas would be handled if this rule was implemented.  In the Summary Report of the Tribal 
Consultation many tribal comments requested “clarification on how the level of water quality necessary 
to protect tribal reserved rights will be determined, who will be responsible for such determinations, 
and what will happen in the event of disagreement between the relevant state(s) and tribe(s).” IDEQ 
echoes these requests for additional clarity. 
Additionally, proposed Section 131.9 requires that water quality standards be established to protect the 
exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-
dependent resource. To determine the extent of unsuppressed tribal rights, EPA is asking states to 
determine the state of resources that existed when the tribal right was established. This is a 
responsibility of the federal government as the party to the treaty not the state. 
 
In closing, IDEQ reiterates our request for an extension of the comment period for further discussion on 
the proposed rule. 
 
Sincerely, 
Mary Anne Nelson, PhD 
Surface & Wastewater Division Administrator 
c: 
Beth Spelsberg, IDEQ 
 
 
 
6 https://data-idwr.hub.arcgis.com/apps/dams-of-idaho-2/explore

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0284 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
DNR, Public Lands Policy Coordinating Office, 1594 W North Temple, #320, PO Box 145610, Salt Lake City, Utah 84114 · 385-228-8443 
 
 
 State of Utah 
  
 
SPENCER J. COX 
 
Governor 
 
 DEIDRE M. HENDERSON 
 
Lieutenant Governor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 6, 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal: https://www.regulations.gov 
 
Jennifer Brundage 
Officer of Water, Standards and Health Protection Division 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC  20460 
 
RE: 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights – 
Proposed Rule  
 
RIN 2040-AG17, 40 CFR Part 131 
 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
 
 
The State of Utah (“Utah” or the “State”) has reviewed the above referenced proposed rule 
(the “Proposed Rule”) that would clarify and prescribe how water quality standards (“WQS”) 
must protect aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources reserved to tribes through treaties, statutes, 
executive orders, or other sources of federal law.1  The State appreciates the opportunity to submit 
comments on this Proposed Rule. 
 
 
As an initial matter, the State values its relationship with the Tribes in Utah and will 
continue to support the Tribes as working partners. The State appreciates the federal 
government’s efforts to protect tribal health and tribal resources.  While the State supports that 
goal, the State has concerns that the Proposed Rule as written is ambiguous.  This ambiguity has 
the strong possibility to cause the rule to be applied overbroadly, despite the Environmental 
Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) indication that the Proposed Rule would primarily play a role in 
                                                 
1 Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 
2022) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. pt. 131). 
Department of Natural Resources 
 
JOEL FERRY 
Executive Director 
 
Public Lands Policy Coordinating Office 
 
REDGE B. JOHNSON 
Director 

Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights – 
Proposed Rule 
RIN 2040-AG17, 40 CFR Part 131 
March 6, 2023 
Page 2 
 
 
DNR, Public Lands Policy Coordinating Office, 1594 W North Temple, #320, PO Box 145610, Salt Lake City, Utah 84114 · 385-228-8443 
 
only two instances.2  Such application will inevitably lead to disputes between tribal and non-
tribal parties instead of cooperation. 
 
As indicated in the notice, numerous states that are responsible for administering or 
overseeing water quality programs may (and likely will) be affected by this rulemaking.  Utah is 
no exception.  As a result, the State will likely have to adjust its WQS.  In doing so, the State will 
necessarily be required to interpret tribal treaties and federal law to ascertain “tribal reserved 
rights,” as well as making other complex determinations to comply with the Proposed Rule. 
 
The Proposed Rule defines “tribal reserved rights” as “any rights to aquatic and/or 
aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through 
treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of Federal law.”3  However, the Proposed 
Rule does not define “aquatic resources” or “aquatic-dependent resources” and does not examine 
which species those terms would include.  All living things need water to survive and, therefore, 
could be considered “aquatic-dependent”. 
 
Given the pivotal role that “aquatic resources” and “aquatic-dependent resources” play in 
determining appropriate WQS, they should be circumscribed by clear and complete definitions.  
Both terms are vague, broad, and subject to numerous interpretations.  The slideshow presented 
by EPA at the public hearings for this Proposed Rule indicated that examples of aquatic and 
aquatic-dependent resources include fish and wild rice.  However, these examples are not 
provided in the Proposed Rule or the notice thereof, nor do the two cited examples provide clear 
definitional guidance.  Without clearly defining these terms, the State anticipates that the terms 
and their definitions will lead to disputes and unintended consequences given how broadly they 
can be interpreted. 
 
Further, while the term “tribal reserved rights” is defined in the Proposed Rule, the 
definition is not specific.  The notice for the Proposed Rule indicates that these rights “include but 
are not limited to the rights to fish; gather aquatic plants; and to hunt for aquatic-dependent 
animals.”4  However, the Proposed Rule does not specify whether these “tribal reserved rights” 
are tied to on or off-reservation activities (or both).  Given that EPA acknowledges “it may be a 
                                                 
2 “EPA anticipates that the circumstances where WQS may need to be adjusted to protect tribal reserved rights would 
fall primarily into two categories: [1] Human health criteria to protect fish consumers, where tribes with reserved 
fishing rights consume more fish and are therefore exposed to greater levels of contaminants in fish . . . [2] Where a 
reserved right is not already accounted for as a designated or presently attained use for a waterbody, but that 
waterbody could be reasonably expected to support that right in the future.”  Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. at 74370.   
3 87 Fed. Reg. at 74378.   
4 87 Fed. Reg. at 74367. 

Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights – 
Proposed Rule 
RIN 2040-AG17, 40 CFR Part 131 
March 6, 2023 
Page 3 
 
 
DNR, Public Lands Policy Coordinating Office, 1594 W North Temple, #320, PO Box 145610, Salt Lake City, Utah 84114 · 385-228-8443 
 
complex inquiry to determine if tribal reserved rights apply in waters subject to state WQS,” these 
rights should be clearly defined in the Proposed Rule.5 
 
In the notice for the Proposed Rule, EPA indicates that “tribal reserved rights” “generally 
do not address the quantification of Winters rights.”6  It should be explicitly stated in this, or any, 
Proposed Rule that Winters rights are not affected by, nor defined by the Proposed Rule.  
Quantification of Winters rights is a matter that is “left for judicial determination.”7  Indeed, any 
potential ex parte secretarial decisions regarding the quantification of Winters rights are clearly 
prohibited by the United States Supreme Court.8 
 
The notice to the Proposed Rule also indicates that the “tribal reserved rights” definition 
does not apply to unratified treaties or reserved rights that were abrogated or otherwise 
superseded.  It further indicates that legal agreements or compacts between states and tribes are 
not within the scope of the rulemaking.  This is an important distinction and should be addressed 
in the Proposed Rule itself, not just in the federal notice.  Otherwise, the Proposed Rule runs the 
risk of potentially restoring rights once terminated by Congress without obtaining Congressional 
approval. 
 
Additionally, the Proposed Rule indicates that under 40 CFR 131.9(b), “the EPA will 
initiate tribal consultation with the [tribal] right holders . . . in determining whether present State 
water quality standards protect applicable tribal reserved rights.”9  As the Proposed Rule is 
written, it does not appear that the individual states will be a part of this consultation process.  
Given that the individual states will be preparing (or already have prepared) the WQS to be 
examined, it is the State’s opinion that the individual states should be involved in that initial 
consultation period. 
 
The Proposed Rule requires any relevant WQS to protect the “exercise of tribal reserved 
rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource” 
(emphasis added).10  While the notice to the Proposed Rule indicates that the “unsuppressed” 
level should balance heritage use of a resource with what is currently reasonably achievable for a 
given waterbody, it does not indicate who, or what authority, ultimately makes this determination.  
                                                 
5 Ibid. 
6 87 Fed. Reg. at 74363. 
7 United States v. Adair, 723 F.2d 1394, 1406 (9th Circ. 1983). 
8 Arizona v. California (Arizona II), 460 U.S. 605, 636-38 (1983). 
9 87 Fed. Reg. at 74378. 
10 Ibid. 

Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights – 
Proposed Rule 
RIN 2040-AG17, 40 CFR Part 131 
March 6, 2023 
Page 4 
 
 
DNR, Public Lands Policy Coordinating Office, 1594 W North Temple, #320, PO Box 145610, Salt Lake City, Utah 84114 · 385-228-8443 
 
What happens where there is great tension between heritage use and what is reasonably 
achievable?  Which factor takes precedence?   
 
The Proposed Rule also indicates that the “unsuppressed” level should account for 
situations where restoration efforts for certain bodies of water are planned or underway.  
Restoration efforts are unfortunately not an exact science.  This Proposed Rule would essentially 
require the states to have a crystal ball in predicting the extent of success, as well as the timing of 
success, for restoration projects when determining the level of unsuppressed use.  The Proposed 
Rule should provide a specific definition of an “unsuppressed level” of use.  Given that water 
quality must be maintained at this level, an understanding of the definition is critical.   
 
 
After introducing this broad Proposed Rule, EPA indicates that WQS would likely need to 
be adjusted mainly in two categories: 
 
[1] Human health criteria to protect fish consumers, where tribes with reserved fishing 
rights consume more fish and are therefore exposed to greater levels of contaminants in 
fish.  This is because there is a differential health risk between right holders and the 
general population of the state because right holders are more highly exposed to the 
resource.  [2] Where a reserved right is not already accounted for as a designated or 
presently attained use for a waterbody, but that waterbody could be reasonably expected to 
support that right in the future (e.g., if restoration efforts are underway).  EPA anticipates 
that this could arise with uses to protect aquatic life, aquatic-dependent wildlife, and users 
of the resources, where those uses are not already designated or presently attained. 
 
Given the two listed scenarios where EPA anticipates that WQS may need to be changed, 
the Proposed Rule is applying broad regulations to relatively narrow issues.   
 
For example, the Proposed Rule does not explicitly differentiate between Great 
Lakes/Pacific Northwest Tribes, who historically depended on waterbodies as a significant source 
of food taken directly from the water, compared with Southwestern Tribes, who relied more on 
terrestrial animals and vegetation.  The Proposed Rule instead applies a broad standard to all 
tribes and all states.  Further, the Proposed Rule requires a water standard for “tribal reserved 
rights” that could potentially go well beyond current water quality standards necessary to irrigate 
contemporary crops.  Generally, water quality negatively impacts aquatic plants and animals 
before impacting terrestrial plants, such as crops.11  As such, the Proposed Rule potentially could 
                                                 
11 “Generally, criteria developed for human health and aquatic life will be sufficiently stringent to protect agricultural 
and industrial designated uses because those uses are generally less sensitive than human health and aquatic life 

Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights – 
Proposed Rule 
RIN 2040-AG17, 40 CFR Part 131 
March 6, 2023 
Page 5 
 
 
DNR, Public Lands Policy Coordinating Office, 1594 W North Temple, #320, PO Box 145610, Salt Lake City, Utah 84114 · 385-228-8443 
 
require states to significantly improve water quality in a source supplying “tribal reserved rights” 
well beyond what is currently required for other water right holders. 
 
The EPA estimates that if the Proposed Rule moves forward, states will face an additional 
yearly compliance burden of approximately 265 to 1,325 labor hours and will incur additional 
spending of between $19,782 and $98,911 per year.12  This is a significant burden and only 
assumes one year of compliance.  This is a particularly high burden for an arid state such as Utah, 
which must also utilize its already stretched-thin water departments, resources, and budgets to 
combat major issues on the Great Salt Lake, Utah Lake, and the Colorado River (just to name a 
few). 
 
Further, not every tribe across the United States traditionally used water resources for 
subsistence in same manner and to the same extent.  Some tribes relied heavily on wild aquatic 
animals and aquatic vegetation for subsistence, trading, and prosperity.  Others relied more on 
wild terrestrial animals and terrestrial vegetation.  Still others relied on water primarily for 
irrigating domesticated crops as a major food source.  These diverse water uses by the many tribes 
within the United States render a single water quality standard practically unworkable, 
particularly with this ambiguous Proposed Rule that treats the various tribes’ needs as one. 
 
In conclusion, the State values its relationship with the eight tribal nations within Utah’s 
borders and will continue to work with them as valued partners.  The State also emphasizes that 
the cultural needs of the Tribes, their health, and their economic prosperity should continue to be 
prioritized by both federal and state governments.  The State’s concern with this Proposed Rule is 
that it lacks specific definitions and is overbroad; its vagueness and general application to all 
tribes has the possibility to create ambiguity and will lead to disagreement as to interpretation 
instead of cooperation among stakeholders.  Essentially, this Proposed Rule uses a sledgehammer 
to tackle issues that are more properly resolved by using a scalpel. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                               
designated uses.”  United States Environmental Protection Agency, Water Quality Standards Handbook, Chapter 3: 
Water Quality Criteria, p. 26 (2017), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2014-10/documents/handbook-
chapter3.pdf.   
12 87 Fed. Reg. at 74374. 

Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights – 
Proposed Rule 
RIN 2040-AG17, 40 CFR Part 131 
March 6, 2023 
Page 6 
 
 
DNR, Public Lands Policy Coordinating Office, 1594 W North Temple, #320, PO Box 145610, Salt Lake City, Utah 84114 · 385-228-8443 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments.  Please direct any written 
correspondence to the Public Lands Policy Coordinating Office at the address below or call to 
discuss any questions or concerns. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
                 
  
 
 
 
Redge B. Johnson 
Director

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0178 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
February 28, 2023 
 
Ms. Jennifer Brundage  
Office of Water, Standards and Health Protection Division  
Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
Dear Ms. Brundage,  
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I submit these comments to the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) regarding EPA’s 
proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791. I am a third-year student in Harvard Law School’s 
Emmett Environmental Law and Policy Clinic. Previously, I worked in the House of Commons 
of the Parliament of Canada. There, I conducted research for meetings of the Standing 
Committee on Justice and Human Rights concerning human trafficking and its impact on 
indigenous communities.  
 
I appreciate the opportunity to submit comments on these proposed regulatory revisions 
concerning tribal rights. Although I support EPA’s proposal, I submit a variety of comments 
intended to highlight difficulties indigenous communities face in asserting their water rights. I 
thank EPA for its thoughtfulness in examining this matter and for working to protect the interests 
of all. 
 
SUBSTANTIVE COMMENTS 
 
Summary 
 
1. Proposed 40 CFR 131.9(b) should be revised to require documentation of all tribal 
consultations with rights holders. 
2. Existing 40 CFR 131.10(a) should be revised to require consideration of spiritual and 
cultural uses of water when determining the water uses to be achieved and protected. 
 
Background 
 
I support EPA’s proposed regulatory revisions to the Water Quality Standards (“WQS”) of the 
Federal Clean Water Act. They seek to make the WQS framework more predictable, clear, and 

 
 
transparent. Instead of addressing tribal reserved rights on a case-by-case basis as state WQS are 
submitted to EPA for review, EPA intends to apply a uniform approach to establishing WQS 
where tribal reserved rights apply and to reviewing such WQS. I write to recommend further 
regulatory revisions within this new uniform framework to address difficulties indigenous 
communities face in asserting their water rights. 
 
Documentation of Tribal Consultations 
 
Proposed 40 CFR 131.9(b) should be revised to require documentation of all tribal consultations 
with rights holders. One major difficulty indigenous communities face in asserting water rights is 
poor legal representation, and a documentation requirement would help identify which tribes 
currently lack effective legal representation.  
 
Poor legal representation has long complicated indigenous tribes’ assertion of water rights. 
Beyond the economic hardship of obtaining effective legal representation, indigenous tribes have 
faced collusion between energy companies and their counsel. For instance, legal counsel has 
historically failed the Hopi tribe.1 The lawyer John Sterling Boyden represented the Hopi in their 
1966 negotiations with Peabody Energy (then, Peabody Western Coal Company) over mining 
and groundwater pumping in Black Mesa.2 But Boyden was working for Peabody at that time⸺a 
blatant conflict of interest.3 The negotiations left the Hopi with only 3.3 percent of gross coal 
sales, approximately half of what the federal government received for coal leases on federal 
land.4 The lease also lacked a reopener clause, a standard clause that allows for renegotiation of 
provisions after a provided number of years.5 The Hopi are just one example of an indigenous 
community not only exploited but also left wary of legal counsel.6  
 
The proposed provision should be revised to require documentation of all tribal consultations 
because, as the Government Accountability Office has determined, EPA’s tracking system does 
not include documentation for every tribal consultation that has occurred.7 And that 
documentation could create a record of which tribes obtain legal counsel to assist with 
consultations and how the legal counsel assists them, thus potentially indicating which tribes 
suffer from poor legal representation in their consultations with EPA. Thus, I recommend the 
revised section 131.9(b) read as follows:  
 
 
1 ROBERT GLENNON, WATER FOLLIES: GROUNDWATER PUMPING AND THE FATE OF AMERICA’S FRESH WATERS 161 
(2002). 
2 Id. at 157, 161. 
3 Id. at 161. 
4 Id. 
5 Id. 
6 Id. 
7 Superfund: EPA Should Improve the Reliability of Data on National Priorities List Sites Affecting Indian Tribes, 
U.S. Government Accountability Office (Jan. 23, 2019), https://www.gao.gov/products/gao-19-123.  

 
 
In reviewing State water quality standards submissions under this section, EPA will  
initiate tribal consultation with the right holders, consistent with applicable EPA tribal  
consultation policies, in determining whether State water quality standards protect  
applicable tribal reserved rights in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section and  
shall document all such consultation. 
 
Although the issue of tribes’ poor legal representation extends beyond tribal consultations, 
revising this provision would be an important step toward ensuring zealous advocacy for all 
indigenous communities.  
 
Spiritual and Cultural Uses of Water 
 
Existing 40 CFR 131.10(a) should be revised to require the consideration of spiritual and cultural 
uses of water when determining the water uses to be achieved and protected. When asserting 
water rights, indigenous communities face a disregard for spiritual and cultural uses of water, but 
consideration of those uses may be necessary to prevent the erasure of a tribe’s culture.   
 
Indigenous tribes have long faced a disregard for spiritual and cultural uses of water when 
asserting water rights. Although tribes believe “[s]prings, wells, and rivers are the homes of 
deities, have divine healing powers, and enhance processes of spiritual transformation,”8 legal 
instruments related to sustainable water management often fail to recognize spiritual and cultural 
uses of water. But these uses typically have immense importance to tribes. For example, the 
Shoshone people have significant spiritual and cultural uses of water. Water has a central place 
in Shoshone cultural life, and the Shoshone people believe that Bah-o-hah, or “water spirits,” 
live in creeks and springs.9 They thus conduct medicinal ceremonies at water sources for healing 
and well-being and believe that if the springs dry up, they will face a “future of perpetual 
poverty, loss of their lands, harm to their culture, and ultimately a decline in their population,” 
tantamount to “‘cultural genocide.’”10 The consideration of spiritual and cultural uses of water 
can therefore be critical to the cultural survival of indigenous tribes.  
 
To preserve indigenous culture, section 131.10(a) should therefore be revised to require the 
consideration of spiritual and cultural uses of water when determining the water uses to be 
achieved and protected. In section III(B) of the Notice, EPA does note that it “recognizes that 
tribal reserved rights to use and access natural and cultural resources are an intrinsic part of tribal 
life and are of deep cultural, economic, and subsistence importance to tribes,” importantly 
legitimating the cultural concerns tribes have concerning water rights. And section VI(B) of the 
Notice similarly states that “the concept of addressing suppression, as described in section 
 
8 Erica L. Porta & Aaron T. Wolf, Intrinsic and Spiritual Dimensions of Water at the Local Scale, and the 
Disconnect with International Institutions, 13 SUSTAINABILITY 16 (2021). 
9 GLENNON, supra at 181. 
10 Id. 

 
 
IV.C.2.ii. of this preamble, takes on a unique approach where tribal members are concerned by 
examining not only the current context but may also look at historical and cultural practices to 
establish the appropriate baseline.” But the existing section 131.10(a) states in part, “The 
classification of the waters of the State must take into consideration the use and value of water 
for public water supplies, protection and propagation of fish, shellfish and wildlife, recreation in 
and on the water, agricultural, industrial, and other purposes including navigation,” failing to 
require the consideration of spiritual and cultural purposes. I therefore recommend that section 
131.10(a) be revised to state: 
 
Each State must specify appropriate water uses to be achieved and protected. The  
classification of the waters of the State must take into consideration the use and value of 
water for public water supplies, protection and propagation of fish, shellfish and wildlife,  
recreation in and on the water, agricultural, industrial, spiritual, cultural, and other  
purposes including navigation. If adopting new or revised designated uses other than the  
uses specified in section 101(a)(2) of the Act, or removing designated uses, States must  
submit documentation justifying how their consideration of the use and value of water for  
those uses listed in this paragraph appropriately supports the State’s action. A use  
attainability analysis may be used to satisfy this requirement. In no case shall a State  
adopt waste transport or waste assimilation as a designated use for any waters of the  
United States. 
 
Such a mandate would align with EPA’s recognition of the cultural importance of water to 
indigenous communities and would simply require the consideration of spiritual and cultural uses 
of water among numerous other uses. Thus the revised provision would provide a workable 
solution that better safeguards tribal reserved rights. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
EPA’s proposed revisions to the WQS better protect tribal reserved rights by providing 
predictability, clarity, and transparency. They also provide for the tribes themselves to inform 
determinations of reserved rights, and EPA clearly appreciates the deep cultural significance of 
water to indigenous communities. But the regulations can go even further in protecting tribal 
reserved rights, by requiring documentation of tribal consultations to address ineffective legal 
representation, and by requiring State consideration of spiritual and cultural uses of water. These 
revisions would not only recognize more fully the historical exploitation of indigenous 
communities but would also express a respect for indigenous concerns and culture. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on this crucial issue. 
 
 

 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
 
 
 
Samantha Ilagan

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0236 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
 
 
Michael Regan, Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW  
Washington, D.C.  20460 
 
Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal at regulations.gov in Docket ID No. EPA–HQ– OW–
2021–0791 
 
Re: 
Comments on EPA Proposed Clean Water Act Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
On behalf of the undersigned organizations and their supporters, please consider the 
following comments for your consideration regarding the Environmental Protection Agency’s 
(“EPA”) Clean Water Act Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights (“Proposed Rule”).  87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022).  We strongly support 
EPA’s efforts to protect water quality as an essential avenue to protect tribal reserved rights and 
other Indigenous rights to water resources.  We urge the EPA to finalize this rule in a manner 
consistent with the EPA’s trust responsibility to tribes.  We also acknowledge that many tribal 
governments and leaders are also submitting comments on the proposed rule, and we are broadly 
supportive of tribal efforts to protect tribal reserved rights and resources via adequate water 
quality standards.   
 
This proposed rulemaking increases tribal involvement in state processes for setting or 
revising state water quality standards.  EPA must support tribes in these state processes 
including, but not limited to, supporting the development of tribally produced data, studies, and 
reports, supporting the use of that data in EPA and state decision-making, and supporting tribes 
in dispute resolution processes.  Ultimately, EPA should provide support to tribes to gather all 
the necessary data that they will need to participate in the process of setting protective water 
quality standards.  EPA must support tribes in these processes such that state water quality 
standards are actually protective of tribal rights and resources. 
We recognize that many tribes have been stewards of the land since time immemorial and 
have knowledge about their traditional areas’ waters, lands, and other resources that are 
encompassed in Indigenous Knowledge (“IK”) or Traditional Ecological Knowledge (“TEK”).  
EPA must provide mechanisms to protect tribal Indigenous Knowledge or Traditional Ecological 
Knowledge as part of the process of setting or revising state water quality standards to protect 
tribal resources.  To the extent that tribes have IK or TEK of an area and its resources, we ask 
that EPA consider that tribes be designated as co-managers of water resources in that area.  
Where feasible, tribal co-management could be a fruitful and efficient approach to protection and 

 
 
 
2 
 
 
restoration of waters and resources that have been damaged as a result of colonial development.  
Co-management has the potential to encourage efficiency and a common approach to protecting 
the health of entire watersheds. 
The final rule should require that, where tribal rights apply, states must adopt designated 
uses specifically for the protection and restoration of tribal rights and resources.  In establishing 
these designated uses and attendant numeric and narrative criteria, states should consider TEK or 
IK, and also should consider adopting or incorporating designated uses that tribes may have 
established as part of their own EPA approved water quality standards.  EPA should not allow 
states to rely solely on antidegradation policy options as a mechanism to protect tribal reserved 
rights. Adopting designated uses that focus specifically on tribal rights would help ensure that 
tribal resources are protected through state programs including antidegradation measures. 
EPA should also clarify how it will review state enforcement of water quality standards 
developed to protect tribal reserved rights.  Setting protective water quality standards is only 
effective if those standards are enforced.  States have used water quality standard variances, 40 
C.F.R. § 131.14, in the past to circumvent meeting water quality standards for certain 
waterbodies.  See Upper Missouri Waterkeeper v. EPA, 15 F4th 966, 975 (9th Cir. 2021) (finding 
that approved variances “replace[] the base water quality standard with the most rigorous 
standard that can feasibly be attained”).  EPA must ensure that these mechanisms are not abused 
such that water quality continues to deteriorate and erode tribal reserved rights. 
Protecting water resources is vital to protecting tribal reserved rights and benefits us all. 
Accordingly, the undersigned organizations are supportive of protecting tribal treaty rights, tribal 
reserved rights, and the water resources necessary to protect those rights.  Requiring states to set 
water quality standards that are actually protective of tribal reserved rights and resources also 
supports healthier ecosystems, and ultimately, cleaner waters for all. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
For Love of Water (FLOW) 
Earthjustice 
River Network 
Endangered Habitats League 
Amigos Bravos 
League of Conservation Voters 
Waterkeepers Chesapeake 
Cahaba River Society 
Alliance of Nurses for a Healthy Environment 

 
 
 
3 
 
 
The Water Collaborative of Greater New Orleans 
Waterkeeper Alliance 
Ohio Environmental Counsel 
Freshwater Future 
GreenLatinos 
Puget Soundkeeper 
Michigan Welfare Rights Organization

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0305 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
TRIBAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE 
PO, BOX 305 • LAPWAl. IDAHO 83540 • (208) 843-2253 
March 6, 2023 
Submitted electronically at: https://www.regulations.gov/commenton/EPA-HQ-0W-2021-
0791-0001 
Ms. Jennifer Brundage 
Office of Water, Standards and Health Protection Division (4305T) 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Headquarters 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
Re: 
EPA's Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights Rulemaking, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
Thank you for participating in the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's ("EPA") government-
to-government consultation with the Nez Perce Tribe ("Tribe") on February 14, 2023, regarding 
EPA rulemaking to revise Water Quality Standards ("WQS") for off-reservation waters subject to 
tribal rights. The Tribe very much appreciates EPA's efforts to develop durable rules to uphold 
tribal rights and protect the health of tribal members exercising those rights. 
Nez Perce Tribal members have fished since time immemorial for subsistence and other purposes, 
and the Nez Perce Tribe reserved its sovereign right to take fish at all usual and accustomed places 
in its 1855 treaty with the United States.' This right does not simply impose responsibilities on the 
United States but, rather, is inextricably linked to, and a guarantee of, Tribal members' ability to 
preserve Nimiipuu culture and identity. Today, many Nez Perce Tribal members consume fish at 
levels that exceed the Idaho general population, EPA's default Fish Consumption Rate of 22 grams 
per day, EPA's default subsistence rate of 142.4 grams per day, and the Fish Consumption Rates 
established by the states of Idaho, Washington, and Oregon.' As a result, Tribal members are 
Treaty with the Nez Perces, June 11, 1855, 12 Stat. 957. 
2
 U.S. EPA, 
A 
Fish Consumption Survey of the Nez Perce Tribe: Final Report, Dec. 2016, 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/defaultifiles/2017-01/docurnents/fish-consumpti on- survey-n ez-perce-dec2016.pd f ("2016 
Fish Consumption Report"); U.S. EPA, Guidance for Assessing Chemical Contaminant Data for Use in Fish 
Advisories. 
Vol. 
2: 
Risk 
Assessment 
and Fish Consumption 
Limits 
Third Edition, 
Nov. 
2000, 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-06/documents/volume2.pdf; U.S. EPA, Human Health Ambient Water 
Quality Criteria: 2015 Update, June 2015, https://www.epa.gov/sites/defau It/ files/2015-10/documents/human-health-
1 

disproportionately exposed to adverse human health effects that result from WQS that are not 
sufficiently stringent to protect Tribal members who harvest and consume fish consistent with the 
Tribe's treaty-reserved fishing right and culture. 
As EPA is aware, the Tribe has long been a national leader in advocating for cleaner, healthier 
waters that reflect tribal values, priorities, and lifeways. The Tribe has worked with EPA for years 
to collect data and produce information on Nez Perce fish consumption,3  with the purpose of 
protecting and furthering that consumption. And, the Tribe has consistently emphasized the 
importance of healthy, harvestable fish runs to support Nez Perce treaty-reserved rights and the 
Nez Perce fishing economy. 
Unfortunately, EPA's current rulemaking, although clearly well-intentioned, does not go far 
enough to fully protect tribal rights and, by extension, tribal populations. If EPA wants to fulfill 
its treaty and trust responsibilities to tribes, it must require in its final rule a hard floor establishing 
a minimum fish consumption rate and associated cancer risk level for waters subject to tribal 
reserved rights. 
The Tribe has appended to this letter its specific comments on EPA's proposed rulemaking. The 
Tribe's comments are intended to supplement, not replace, the comments it provided in Executive 
Session during government-to-government consultation with EPA on February 14, 2023. The 
Tribe asks that EPA make the most of the opportunity this rulemaking presents to fulfill its treaty 
and trust obligations to the Nez Perce Tribe and other tribes. The Tribe also asks that EPA reconsult 
with the Tribe prior to issuing a final rule. 
Sincerely, 
ACa/rm-60-- it. *Way 
Samuel N. Penney 
Chairman 
2015-update-factsheet.pdfi letter from Chris Hladick, Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA, to John Tippets, Director, 
Idaho Department of Environmental Quality (Apr. 4, 2019), EPA's Approval of Idaho's New and Revised Human 
Health Water Quality Criteria for Toxics and Other Water Quality Standards Provisions, at 18, 
https://www.epa.govls ites/default/files/2019-
04/documents/04042019_cover_letter_approval_of deq_human_health_criteria_signed.pdfi 
U.S. 
EPA, 
Water 
Quality 
Standards 
for 
Surface 
Waters 
of 
the 
State 
of 
Washington 
(Jan. 
4, 
2022) 
at 
24, 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2014-12/documents/wawqs.pdf; U.S. EPA, Water Quality Standards: 
Beneficial Uses, Policies, and Criteria for Oregon (June 22, 2021), https://www.epa.gov/sitesidefault/files/2020-
11/documents/orwqs.pdf. 
3  In 1994, EPA completed a report containing fish consumption information from tribes with treaty-reserved rights in 
the Columbia River Basin the Nez Perce Tribe, Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Yakama Nation, Confederated 
Tribes of the Warm Springs Indian Reservation, and the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation. 
(Columbia River Inter-Tribal Fish Commission, A Fish Consumption Survey of the Umatilla, Nez Perce, Yakama, and 
Warm Springs Tribes of the Columbia River Basin, Technical Report 94-3, Oct. 1994, https://www.critfc.org/wp-
content/uploads/2015/06/94-3report.pdf) ("1994 Fish Consumption Report"). The 1994 Fish Consumption Report 
served as supporting information for Oregon's adoption in 2011 of a Fish Consumption Rate of 175 grams per day 
with an associated Cancer Risk Level of 10'. Then, in 2016, EPA and the Tribe completed what is recognized as a 
ground-breaking survey that used the latest science to determine Nez Perce Tribal members' true Fish Consumption 
Rate. (2016 Fish Consumption Report). 
2 

Nez Perce Tribe's Comments on 
EPA's Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved 
Rights Rulemaking, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
EPA's Legal Duties 
•
The Nez Perce Tribe ("Tribe") appreciates that the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
("EPA") is acknowledging, through this rulemaking, its treaty and trust responsibilities to 
uphold tribal rights by protecting the water resources that sustain the Tribe's and other 
tribes' rights. 
•
Respect for the hierarchy of laws is fundamental to the U.S. legal system. The U.S. 
Constitution is the supreme law and may not be contradicted by federal statutes or other 
lesser laws. Moreover, under the U.S. Constitution, "all Treaties made, or which shall be 
made, under the Authority of the United States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land."4 
•
Tribes signed treaties with the U.S. Government. EPA's obligation, as both a party to the 
Tribe's treaty and a trustee of the Tribe's treaty-reserved resources, is to ensure that the 
United States honors its commitments in those treaties in all aspects of its work, including 
the implementation of federal statutes such as the Clean Water Act ("CWA"). Moreover, 
the CWA itself states that it "shall not be construed as . . . affecting or impairing the 
provisions of any treaty of the United States."' 
•
Under its 1855 Treaty,6  the Tribe is legally entitled to take up to half the legally harvestable 
runs for subsistence consumption and other purposes that are destined to pass through its 
usual and accustomed fishing places.' These Treaty-reserved fishing rights include 
meaningful protections against state interference.8  Since there is no plausible legal theory 
under which the United States could guarantee to tribes the right to subsistence fish and 
then purposefully undermine the conditions that make treaty-reserved subsistence fishing 
possible,9  EPA and states must ensure that Water Quality Standards ("WQS") for waters 
subject to the Tribe's treaty-reserved right do not hinder the Tribe's right to safely 
consume, or use for other purposes, up to half of the legally harvestable runs that are 
destined to pass through its usual and accustomed places. 
•
EPA's duty as a treaty signatory and trustee extends to off-reservation waters. EPA must, 
therefore, limit state discretion under the CWA to promulgate WQS in off-reservation 
U.S. Const. art. VI, cl. 2. 
5 33 U.S.C.A. § 1371. 
6  Treaty with the Nez Perces, June 11, 1855, 12 Stat. 957. 
7  United States v. State of Washington, 520 F.2d 676, 688 (9th Cir. 1975); Washington v. Washington State Com. 
Passenger Fishing Vessel Ass'n, 443 U.S. 658, 685, modified sub norn. Washington v. United States, 444 U.S. 816 
(1979). 
United States v. Washington, 853 F.3d 946, 959 (9th Cir. 2017), aff'd, Washington v. United States, 138 S. Ct. 1832 
(2018) (affirming that tribes' treaty-reserved fishing rights have been violated by state-installed culverts that interfere 
with fish passage and thereby diminish the number of fish available to tribes for harvest). 
9  Amanda Rogerson and Mike Lopez, Upholding Tribal Treaties with the Clean Water Act, The Business Lawyer, 
Vol. 71, No. 4, Fall 2016, American Bar Association, 2020. 
3 

waters subject to tribal rights. EPA must only approve or promulgate WQS that are fully 
consistent with upholding tribal rights. EPA has previously acknowledged this duty: 
Many areas where treaty-reserved fishing rights are 
exercised cannot be directly protected or regulated by tribal 
governments to ensure adequate water quality; therefore, the 
responsibility falls to the federal government (and the states) 
to ensure their protection. As such, it is necessary and 
appropriate to consider tribal treaties to ensure that actions 
under the CWA are consistent with such treaties.1° 
•
EPA has previously stated that sections 101(a)(2), 303(c)(2)(A), and 304(a) of CWA" 
alone require sufficient water quality not only to support the propagation of fish and 
shellfish but to ensure that fish and shellfish can be safely consumed at unsuppressed 
levels.12  EPA also states in its Federal Register notice for this rulemaking: 
[The statute's structure and objectives for the establishment 
and oversight of WQS, including the discretion afforded to 
EPA, provide ample room for the agency to consider and 
give effect to all applicable reserved rights...." EPA finds 
that implementing the CWA to give effect to applicable 
reserved rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent 
resources does not require that the relevant treaty, statute, 
executive order, or legal instrument explicitly reference 
water quality." 
General Comments 
•
EPA's rulemaking is a positive step toward the United States upholding treaty and trust 
responsibilities to ensure tribes' off-reservation rights and resources are not impaired and 
tribal members can safely consume fish and rice at unsuppressed levels. However, EPA's 
rule does not do enough to fully uphold tribal rights and tribes' ability to preserve their 
culture and identity. 
•
To ensure tribal rights and resources are protected in the future, EPA must give states clear 
requirements and stringent compliance timelines and distinctly articulate the range of 
actions permissible under the CWA to uphold treaty-reserved rights in off-reservation 
waters subject to tribal rights. Specifically, EPA's final rule should include minimum, 
'' Letter from Dennis J. McLerran, Regional Administrator, U.S. EPA, to John Tippets, Director, Idaho Department 
of Environmental Quality (Jan. 19, 2017), The EPA's Preliminary Review of DEQ's December 13, 2016, Submittal 
of New and Revised Human Health Criteria - Key Concems, at 1-2. 
" 33 U.S.C. § 1251; 33 U.S.C. § 1313; 33 U.S.C. § 1314. 
12  U.S. EPA, Human Health Ambient Water Quality Criteria and Fish Consumption Rates: Frequently Asked 
Questions, Jan. 18, 2013, https://www.epa.gov/s ites/default/fi les/2015-12/documents/hh- fish-con sumption-faqs.pdf. 
'3  Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74,361, 74,364-
74,365 (Dec. 5, 2022). 
14  Id at 74,366. 
4 

prescriptive WQS and associated Cancer Risk Levels for waters covered by tribal rights to 
ensure state WQS do not fall below these minimum federal protections. 
o In 2019, the state of Idaho recommended, and EPA approved, Human Health 
Criteria based on a Fish Consumption Rate of 66.5 grams per day at 10. As EPA 
is aware, this Fish Consumption Rate and associated Cancer Risk Level is the 
functional equivalent of just 6.65 grams per day at 10-6. 
EPA previously used a default Fish Consumption Rate of 6.5 grams per day in 
estimates of health risk. When discussing this previous default rate, EPA's National 
Environmental Justice Advisory Council stated: "[t]his is about one 8-ounce fish 
serving per month - an amount that is outdated and inaccurate even for the general 
population. And, this amount grossly underestimates the consumption rates for 
many communities of color, low-income communities, tribes, and other indigenous 
people."15 
Needless to say, Idaho's rate—the functional equivalent of 6.65 grams per day at 
10-6—is not protective of the Tribe's reserved rights and resources. As a result, 
Idaho's current rate does not uphold the Tribe's right to take up to half of the 
harvestable fish that are destined to pass through its usual and accustomed fishing 
places.16  EPA needs to give itself the tools to right this wrong. 
0 EPA has broad legal authority under the U.S. Constitution, tribal treaties, case law, 
and the CWA to require that states meet minimum requirements for the protection 
of water quality under federal jurisdiction. 
•
EPA recommends in its Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality 
Criteria for the Protection of Human Health (2000) ("2000 Methodology"), 
a Cancer Risk Level of 10-6  for the general population.17  EPA should not 
allow states to protect high consuming tribal populations at a lower level 
than it recommends for the general population. EPA should, through this 
rulemaking, ensure highly exposed populations, including such tribal 
populations, receive a more, not less, protective Cancer Risk Level than the 
general population. 
•
EPA should update its default Fish Consumption Rate for subsistence 
fishers, since its current rate of 142.4 grams per day was derived from a 
15  National Environmental Justice Advisory Council, Fish Consumption and Environmental Justice: A Report 
developed from the National Environmental Justice Advisory Council Meeting of December 3-6, 2001, Nov. 2002 
(revised), at 29, https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-02/documents/fish-consump-report_1102.pdf. 
16  United States v. State of Washington, 520 F.2d 676, 688 (9th Cir. 1975); Washington v. Washington State Com. 
Passenger Fishing Vessel Ass'n, 443 U.S. 658, 685, modified sub nom. Washington v. United States, 444 U.S. 816 
(1979). 
17  U.S. EPA, Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human Health (2000), 
Technical 
Support 
Document 
Volume 
I: 
Risk 
Assessment 
Final 
(Oct. 
2000), 
at 
1-8, 
1-
12,https://www.epa.gov/s ites/defau lt/fi les/2018-12/documents/methodology-wqc-protection-hh-2000-volumel.pdf. 
5 

mid-1990s survey of tribal fish consumption." EPA should require in this 
rulemaking that states, at minimum, use EPA's updated Fish Consumption 
Rate for subsistence fishers for waters covered by tribal fishing rights. 
•
For the Pacific Northwest, where tribes, including the Nez Perce Tribe, 
reserved rights under Stevens treaties, EPA should, at minimum, require 
states to use a Fish Consumption Rate of 175 grams per day with an 
associated Cancer Risk Level of 10-6  for ceded waters. This minimum floor 
for Pacific Northwest tribal waters will help ensure consistent protection for 
Stevens treaty tribes, which are entitled to more fish per capita than the 
general population due to their right to take up to half the legally harvestable 
runs, for subsistence consumption or other uses, that are destined to pass 
through its usual and accustomed fishing places.19  This minimum floor for 
Pacific Northwest tribal waters would also help with the attainment and 
maintenance of Oregon's and Washington's current WQS, as required by 40 
CFR 131.10(b). Although this Fish Consumption Rate and Cancer Risk 
Level is not sufficient to fully protect historical, non-suppressed tribal 
consumption in Pacific Northwest waters, it would provide a necessary 
baseline of protection. 
•
EPA's final rule should require that states, when calculating WOS, use a Fish Consumption 
Rate that represents the 90th percentile consumption rate for the tribal right holders. Such 
a requirement would bring EPA's default Fish Consumption Rate for tribal peoples into 
line with its default Cancer Risk Level of 22 grams per day for the general population, 
which represents the "90th percentile consumption rate of fish and shellfish from island 
and nearshore waters for the U.S. adult population 21 years of age and older, based on 
NHANES data from 2003 to 2010. 2°  This concept is supported by EPA's National 
Environmental Justice Advisory Council stated in its dated but still highly relevant report 
titled "Fish Consumption and Environmental Justice:" 
"[W]hile EPA's new default values represent a vast 
improvement over the old 6.5 g/day default, the new default  
values are problematic in that they aim to protect the general  
population at the 90th percentile, but to protect subsistence  
fishers only at a level somewhere "in the range of average 
estimates." This choice provides disparate levels of 
protection to the general population, on the one hand, and 
subsistence subpopulations, on the other. Taking this view, 
it is unclear why EPA's default values do not set protection  
Is  National Environmental Justice Advisory Council, Fish Consumption and Environmental Justice: A Report 
developed from the National Environmental Justice Advisory Council Meeting of December 3-6, 2001, Nov. 2002 
(revised), at 30, https://www.epa.gov/sites/defaultifiles/2015-02/documents/fish-consump-report_1102.pdf. 
19  United States v. State of Washington, 520 F.2d 676, 688 (9th Cir. 1975); Washington v. Washington State Com. 
Passenger Fishing Vessel Ass'n, 443 U.S. 658, 685, modified sub nom. Washington v. United States, 444 U.S. 816 
(1979). 
20 
U.S. 
EPA, 
Human 
Health 
Ambient 
Water 
Quality 
Criteria: 
2015 
Update, 
June 
2015, 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-10/documents/human-health-2015-update-factsheet.pdf. 
6 

for subsistence subpopulations at the 90th percentile — as 
they do for the general population — rather than at the 
average....it is the very highest consumers that warrant 
particular attention and protection, because it is these 
individuals who are consuming at levels and in accordance 
with practices that are most consonant with the group's or 
tribe's traditional, cultural, religious or spiritual beliefs. 
Taking this view, it may be appropriate in some cases for 
states, tribes, and the EPA to use values that target protection 
at the 95th or 99th percentile, or even at the maximum value, 
for particular subsistence subpopulations."21 
•
EPA needs firm, public guidance in regulation or policy as to how EPA will evaluate 
whether a state's proposed WQS are protective of tribal rights. 
•
EPA should develop in regulation or guidance objective criteria for determining the 
jurisdictional boundaries of tribal waters. 
o
EPA should consider all waters within a tribe's ceded territory, as reflected in 
treaties and/or adjudicated by the Indian Claims Commission, to be tribal waters. 
For waters outside a tribe's ceded territory, tribes should be required to demonstrate 
established, federally-recognized legal rights, through treaty or other legal vehicle, 
as well as compelling evidence of the nature and scope of such rights. 
o
EPA should offer to consult with any tribe in whose ceded territory another tribe 
asserts rights prior to issuing any jurisdictional determinations regarding the 
boundaries of tribal waters and should only make jurisdiction determinations with 
the consent of affected tribes. 
o
States should have no role in determining the boundaries of tribal waters. Tribal 
rights stem from tribes' inherent sovereignty and from federal agreements, 
determinations, and law. States had no role in creating tribal rights and should, 
therefore, have no role in interpreting them. EPA and relevant tribes should, based 
on federal law, determine the boundaries of tribal waters and inform the relevant 
states. 
•
EPA should require more stringent Cancer Risk Levels for tribal communities to ensure 
environmental justice for such communities. In his Executive Order on Tackling the 
Climate Crisis at Home and Abroad, President Biden stated: 
To secure an equitable economic future, the United States 
must ensure that environmental and economic justice are key 
21  National Environmental Justice Advisory Council, Fish Consumption and Environmental Justice: A Report 
developed from the National Environmental Justice Advisory Council Meeting of December 3-6, 2001, Nov. 2002 
(revised), 
at 
31, 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-02/documents/fish-consump-report_1102.pdf. 
(emphasis added). 
7 

considerations in how we govern . . . . Agencies shall make 
achieving environmental justice part of their missions by 
developing prograrns, policies, and activities to address the 
disproportionately high and adverse human health, 
environmental, climate-related and other cumulative 
impacts on disadvantaged communities, as well as the 
accompanying economic challenges of such impacts.22 
And, previously, EPA's National Environmental Justice Advisory Council has stated: 
One might be more or less susceptible to a given level or 
"dose" of an environmental contaminant depending on one's 
life stage...; one's prior exposure to the same or other 
contaminants (e.g. those who have become sensitized 
through prior exposures and now have more severe 
responses); one's genetic makeup...; or one's existing 
conditions or diseases . . . . 
One may also be more or less able to prepare for and recover 
from exposure to [a] given level or "dose" of an 
environmental contaminant depending on the various 
resources an individual, community, group, or tribe can call 
upon and depending on other aspects of one's life 
circumstances. Thus, one may be more or less able to 
withstand and recover from a toxic insult depending on one's 
income, the quality of one's baseline diet, whether one is 
employed, whether one has access to adequate health care, 
whether one has adequate insurance, and whether one's 
community or tribe can assist to provide coping systems. 
Current risk assessment, risk management and risk 
communication methods do not account adequately for 
susceptibilities and co-risk factors that affect individuals'  
responses to the environmental contaminants with which 
they come in contact. This is especially troubling to the 
extent that current risk estimates are made assuming the life 
circumstances of the general population or the affluent and 
fail thereby to account for the particular susceptibilities and 
co-risk factors that tend to be clustered in or characterize 
various communities of color, low-income communities, 
tribes, and other indigenous peoples. To take but a single co-
risk factor by way of example, consider that...American 
Indians and Alaskan Natives, one in three lives below the 
federal poverty line....EPA's and other agencies' risk 
n Exec. Order No. 14008, 86 Fed. Reg. 7,619, 7,629 (Jan. 27, 2021); https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-
room/presidential-actions/2021/01/27/executive-order-on-tackling-the-climate-crisis-at-home-and-abroad/. 
8 

assessment, management and communication methods need 
to be able to incorporate and address differences in 
susceptibilities and co-risk factors.23 
•
The Tribe takes issue with an assumption at the heart of this rulemaking. The Federal 
Register notice for this rulemaking states: 
where a tribe has the right to hunt an aquatic-dependent 
species, for example, the species may already be protected 
in accordance with this proposed rulemaking by a state's 
"wildlife" designated use and associated criteria, such that 
this rulemaking would not require any additional protection 
of that species beyond what is already required under the 
CWA and EPA's existing WQS regulation....24 
EPA does not anticipate that more stringent criteria to 
protect aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources themselves 
would be necessary in most cases to comply with this 
proposed rulemaking than already required by the existing 
Federal WQS regulations.25 
The Tribe is concerned by these statements because it does not believe that current aquatic 
life criteria in the state of Idaho are protecting tribal rights. Aquatic life criteria are not a 
functional substitute for human health criteria. Aquatic life criteria are based on how much 
of a pollutant can be present in surface water before it is likely to harm plant and animal 
life. This is not the same as human health criteria, which are risk based and developed 
based on the maximum concentration of a pollutant in a water body considered to be 
protective of human health. 
•
This rulemaking again highlights the need for the United States to remedy a longstanding 
wrong by developing a comprehensive, searchable database of its legal agreements with 
tribal nations. 
•
EPA needs to protect tribal rights through rulemaking, which is binding, not through 
guidance, which is not binding. 
23  National Environmental Justice Advisory Council, Fish Consumption and Environmental Justice: A Report 
developed from the National Environmental Justice Advisory Council Meeting of December 3-6, 2001, Nov. 2002 
(revised), at 42, https://www.epa.gov/sitesidefault/files/2015-02/documents/fish-consump-report_1102.pdf. 
24  Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74,361, 74,370 
(Dec. 5, 2022). 
25  Id at 74,371. 
9 

Specific Comments and Questions on Text of Proposed Regulations 
•
EPA's proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.5(a)(9): 
o
How will EPA determine whether "[s]tate adopted water quality standards protect 
tribal reserved rights, where applicable, consistent with § 131.9"? 
•
EPA's proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.5(b): 
o
If EPA determines that a state's WQS are inconsistent with the factors listed in 40 
C.F.R. § 131.5(a)(1) through (9) and decides it must promulgate new or revised 
standards for the state, what criteria will it use to determine the new or revised 
standards it promulgates? 
•
EPA's proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.6(g): 
o
The Tribe opposes EPA's proposal to require that states include in any WQS they 
submit to EPA for review, "information which will aid the agency in evaluating 
whether the submission protects tribal reserved rights consistent with § 131.9, 
including: (1) Information about the scope, nature, and current and past use of the 
tribal reserved rights, as informed by the right holders; and (2) Data and methods 
used to develop the water quality standards." 
•
Tribal rights are federal law and should be determined by the United States 
in conjunction with tribes, prior to, or in conjunction with, a state's 
submittal of WQS to EPA for review. 
•
Tribal treaties are a contract between the United States and the 
signatory tribe or tribes, and a "fundamental precept of common law 
[is] that the intention of the parties to a contract control[s] its 
interpretation."26 
•
EPA has a trust responsibility to advocate on behalf of tribes 
(whether they have reserved rights via treaty with the United States 
or hold other tribal rights) with states. 
•
The United States and affected tribes should, therefore, consult to 
determine the WQS requirements imposed by relevant tribal treaty 
or other tribal rights. EPA and affected tribes should then provide 
their understanding of what the treaties to which they are party or 
other tribal rights require of states, not the other way around. It is 
incompatible with EPA's treaty and trust duties to tribes for EPA to 
simply referee disputes between states and tribes. 
26  Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v. United States, 444 F.2d 547, 551 (Ct. Cl. 1971) (internal citations omitted). 
10 

•
States should not be given license, or be required, to interpret the 
substantive requirements of applicable tribal reserved rights when 
developing proposed WQS. Such a requirement is unacceptable under treaty 
and trust legal principles. 
•
Under 40 C.F.R. § 131.6(g), states should simply be required, when 
submitting WQS to EPA for review, to provide EPA with an explanation of 
how they have accommodated or incorporated the WQS requirements of 
applicable tribal rights, as transmitted to them by EPA and affected tribes. 
•
EPA's proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(1): 
o
The Tribe supports EPA requiring the establishment of WQS that protect the 
"unsuppressed" exercise of tribal rights. 
s 
The 
Tribe 
believes that 
heritage 
consumption 
rates 
represent 
"unsuppressed" tribal consumption. The Tribe, therefore, does not support 
the following comment in EPA's Federal Register notice for this 
rulemaking: 
The unsuppressed level should balance 
heritage use of a resource with what is 
currently 
reasonably 
achievable 
for a 
particular waterbody. For example, in 
determining the unsuppressed level of a 
resource for the purpose of establishing 
WQS, it may be appropriate to take into 
consideration both heritage rates of use of 
that 
resource 
and 
factors 
that 
have 
substantially altered the pollutant burden, 
hydrology, or availability of the resource, 
such that use of the resource at heritage rates 
is not feasible.' 
This commentary completely undermines EPA's use of the word 
"unsuppressed" in this proposed rule. By suggesting that states have the 
discretion to reduce protection for tribal consumption to rates "currently 
reasonably achievable," based on pollution, altered hydrology, or other 
factors, EPA ensures that states will not be required by this proposed rule 
to actually protect unsuppressed tribal consumption. 
o
How will EPA determine whether a state is complying with proposed 40 C.F.R. 
§ 131.9(a)(1)? 
27  Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74,361, 74,369 
(Dec. 5, 2022). 
11 

o
What WQS will be deemed protective  of the "exercise of tribal reserved rights 
unsuppressed  by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent 
resource?" (emphasis added) 
o
What level of health protection, including Cancer Risk Levels, are tribal members 
who consume heritage rates of fish entitled to? 
o
EPA will not achieve WQS that are protective of unsuppressed  tribal consumption 
levels without requiring states to use a minimum Cancer Risk Level and Fish 
Consumption Rate. 
•
EPA recommends a Cancer Risk Level of 1 0-6  for the general population.28 
EPA should require that states protect tribal right holders at at least this 
level. 
•
EPA should also require that states adopt a minimum Fish Consumption 
Rate that represents at least the 90th percentile consumption rate for tribal 
right holders. Such a requirement would bring EPA's default Fish 
Consumption Rate for tribal peoples into line with its default Fish 
Consumption Rate of 22 grams per day for the general population, which 
represents the "90th percentile consumption rate of fish and shellfish from 
island and nearshore waters for the U.S. adult population 21 years of age 
and older, based on NHANES data from 2003 to 2010. 29 
•
EPA's proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(2): 
o
To avoid states labeling tribes as a subpopulation that are entitled to less protection 
than the general population, EPA has decided to require that states treat tribes as 
the general population. This approach must be supplemented with additional 
protections for high fish and rice-consuming tribal members. 
o
EPA's proposal to require that states protect the "health of the right holders to at 
least the same risk level as provided to the general population of the State"3°  is the 
functional equivalent, given EPA's current guidance (the 2000 Methodology), of 
suggesting that states use at least a 10-5  Cancer Risk Level for tribal waters. A 10-5 
Cancer Risk Level is simply insufficiently protective of tribal members who often 
consume fish at levels that far exceed the general population. Moreover, without 
regulatory requirements, EPA cannot even guarantee state protection of tribal 
waters at the 10-5  Cancer Risk Level. 
" U.S. EPA, Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human Health (2000), 
Oct. 2000, at 1-8, 1-12, https://www.nj.gov/drbc/library/documents/EPA_human-health-criteria2000.pdf. 
" 
U.S. 
EPA, 
Human 
Health 
Ambient 
Water 
Quality 
Criteria: 
2015 
Update, 
June 
2015, 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-10/documents/human-health-2015-update-factsheet.pdf. 
" 87 Fed. Reg. 74,361, 74,366 (Dec. 5, 2022) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. §131.9(a)(2)). 
12 

•
EPA provides no scientific justification or rationale for suggesting, through 
this rulemaking, the protection of tribes at a 10-5  over a 10-6  Cancer Risk 
Level. This is troubling especially given that the minimum 10-5  Cancer Risk 
Level provided in the 2000 Methodology for the general population was 
never intended to protect tribal reserved rights. 
o
EPA should simply require in this proposed regulation that states use at least a 10-6 
Cancer Risk Level for tribal waters. 
•
EPA's proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(c)(1): 
o
EPA should require states to designate a specific tribal use or uses for tribal waters. 
EPA should not allow states to incorporate protection of tribal rights into current 
designated uses, such as "recreation," for the general population. States should have 
to acknowledge tribal rights through tribal-specific designations. 
•
EPA's proposed 40 C.F.R. 4 131.9(c)(2): 
o
Would EPA's proposal to require that states establish water quality criteria 
consistent with 40 C.F.R. § 131.11 that is protective of tribal rights require states to 
use, at minimum, EPA's current recommended (or future recommended) default 
Fish Consumption Rate of 142.4 grams per day for subsistence fishers3i  for waters 
covered by tribal fishing rights? 
•
EPA's proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(c)(3): 
o
EPA should require states to amend their antidegradation policy (option 2 in the 
federal register notice) to ensure the ongoing protection of tribal rights in those 
waters. Although designating Outstanding Resource Water ("ORWs") (option 1 in 
the federal register notice) provides good, durable water quality protection, in some 
states like Idaho the designation of ORWs requires legislative action (and, although 
several waterbodies in Idaho have been considered for ORW designation, none 
have received legislative approval). Thus, it is unlikely some states will designate 
ORWs. Unless EPA can require ORWs in tribal waters without state legislative 
approval, EPA requiring states to amend their antidegradation policy (option 2) will 
provide better minimal protection for tribal waters. The Tribe supports EPA 
requiring binding provisions on states that will not fail to protect tribal waters. 
•
EPA's proposed 40 C.F.R. 131.9(b): 
o
If a tribe lets EPA know through consultation that it does not believe a state's 
proposed WQS protect applicable tribal rights, how will EPA evaluate the tribe's 
position? 
31  U.S. EPA, Guidance for Assessing Chemical Contaminant Data for Use in Fish Advisories. Vol. 2: Risk Assessment 
and Fish Consumption Limits Third Edition, Nov. 2000, https://www.epa.gov/sites/defaultifiles/2015-
06/documents/volume2.pdf. 
13 

o
What criteria will EPA use to determine whether state proposed WQS are protective 
of applicable tribal rights? 
•
EPA's proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.20(a): 
o
The Tribe strongly opposes the EPA's proposed incorporation of the following 
language into 40 C.F.R. § 131.20(a) State review: "This review shall include 
evaluating whether there are tribal reserved rights applicable to State waters and 
whether water quality standards need to be revised to protect those rights pursuant 
to § 131.9." 
•
During the public triennial review process, states should not  be given 
license, or required, to evaluate whether there are applicable tribal reserved 
rights in waters for which the state has jurisdiction to promulgate WQS. 
Rather, it is the duty of EPA, under treaty, contract, and trust legal 
principles, to consult with the relevant tribal rights holder to determine 
where tribal rights exist and the WQS requirements imposed by those tribal 
rights. It is then EPA's duty to inform the states of those requirements. The 
Tribe cannot state this strongly enough. 
•
How many staff, funding, and other resources does EPA plan to dedicate to implementing 
this amended regulation? 
o
EPA should fund fish and rice consumption studies for all tribes with such off-
reservation rights. 
14

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0233 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
AD firwa 
AVID 
LArthl 3Acpalop 
TÍLE Or 
' 
ri r IPF/A 
• I
'"P'A1101
tel
 
HIEF BLACKBIRD CENTER 
RO. Box 39 
Oclanah, Wisconsin 54s61 
March 6, 2023 
Michael Regan 
Administrator 
Via Federal eRulemaking Portal at regulations.gov in 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
Re: 
Comments on EPA Proposed Clean Water Act Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Treaty Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 
2022) 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
I am writing to follow on our March 3, 2023 meeting with Deborah Nagle, Sarah Heissel, 
Tera Fong, Jennifer Brundage, Corey Buffo, David Pfiefer, Aaron Johnson, and Jennifer 
Manville from your office in Odanah, WI regarding the above EPA Proposed Clean Water Act 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Treaty Rights ("Proposed Rule"), 87 
Fed. Reg: 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022). During the meeting, we provided Director Nagle with 
information regarding the Bad River Band's Treaty reserved rights to water or water-dependent 
resources and regulatory authorities and implementation processes under Section 303(c) and 401 
of the Clean Water Act.' During that meeting we also discussed the interrelated nature of 
existing Treaty rights and Federal water and wetland permitting procedures. 
What follows is: 
I  Bad River Band of the Lake Superior Tribe of Chippewa Indians Water Quality Standards, 
adopted by Resolution No. 7-6-11-441 of the Bad River Band and available at 
https://www.epa.govisites/default/files/2014-12 documentsibad_river_band wqs.pdf; and Water 
Quality Certification and Water Quality Review Code ("Bad River Tribal Code" or "BRTC" 
"Chapter 324"). 
Teiephone (715 682-7111 
Fax (715) 682-7113 

Comments on EPA Proposed Clean Water Act Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to 
Protect Treaty Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022) 
March 6, 2023 
Page 2 of 7 
1. A brief description of Treaty reserved rights key law and concepts that EPA 
should reflect in its final rule to determine if tribal reserved rights apply in 
waters subject to state water quality standards (WQS); and 
2. Comments regarding situations where the Band's reserved rights and regulatory 
processes have a significant interaction with the Proposed Rule's methodology 
for deriving water quality standards and dispute resolution. 
1. Treaty reserved rights key law and concepts that EPA should reflect in its final rule to 
determine if tribal reserved rights apply in waters subject to state WQS. 
We want to confirm our comment that EPA must determine if tribal reserved rights apply 
in waters subject to state WQS, the nature of those rights and where they apply, and then derive 
water quality standards, not a state. Although there may be a great deal of similarity in the 
Federal and state determinations under the final rule, we believe the trust relationship between 
the Federal government and Native American tribes requires that EPA determine if tribal 
reserved rights apply in waters subject to state WQS and derive WQS to protect tribal reserved 
rights. 
This is especially true for our land and water. The Bad River Reservation is located in 
the Western Lake Superior Region. Forests enveloped most of these lands except for a fan-
shaped northern stretch of coastal wetlands on Lake Superior and some agriculture in the 
southwest corner of the Reservation. Known as the Kakagon and Bad River Sloughs, the coastal 
wetlands complex consists of twelve square miles of wild rice emergent marsh, one of the many 
wetland types making up the sloughs and providing habitat alive with fish, mammals, herptiles, 
and nesting migratory birds. Dense stands of sugar maple, elm, basswood, cedar, and ash cover 
the rich low-lying river floodplains of the Bad, Marengo, White, Tyler Forks, and Potato Rivers 
as well as their tributaries. Upstream of the red clay plain (where the rivers have slowed and 
meandered to create their wide, rich floodplains), is the transition zone of glacial till deposits and 
then the higher areas like the Penokee Hills. See the attached Map Titled The Bad River 
Reservation and Watershed with Mapped Watercourses on Page 7. These areas exist mainly 
outside of the Bad River Reservation but the headwater wetlands and streams in them provided 
the basis for flow for the aforementioned rivers and act as recharge for the groundwater aquifers 
that feed the streams that form in the glacial till transition zone as well as the aquifers that the 
Tribe and many private landowners rely on for drinking water. 
Where these waters are subject to state WQS, there is no comparable water or water-
dependent resources anywhere. They are unique and irreplaceable resources, finite in nature, and 

Comments on EPA Proposed Clean Water Act Water Quality Standards Regulatoly Revisions to 
Protect Treaty Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022) 
March 6, 2023 
Page 3 of 7 
WQS that are established under the final rule must recognize that. To accornplish, two Treaty 
reserved rights key law and concepts that EPA should reflect in its final rule are: 
a. federal reserved water rights attach to the Bad, Bad, Marengo, White, Tyler 
Forks, and Potato Rivers as well as their tributaries which flow from headwaters 
onto reservation homelands. Clean water from these resources ensure the health 
and abundance of the Reservation's wild rice fields and coastal fish nurseries, 
cold-water anadromous fisheries, clean drinking water, and Lake Superior 
commercial and home use fisheries. 
EPA's final rule must protect these rights.2 
b. reserved rights to hunt, fish, and gather in ceded territories have not been 
protected or recognized by the state.3  EPA's final rule must require EPA to 
identify and protect ceded territory rights, as well. The final rule should include a 
definition of "tribal reserved rights" that makes clear that tribal reserved rights 
can include not only hunting, fishing, and gathering rights, but cultural, 
ceremonial, and subsistence uses (including as described by Chairman Wiggins 
for drinking water or primary contact activities). 
EPA has experience completing extensive rulernaking for waters that have shared 
managements. These rules not only ensure adequate representation of aquatic 
resources, but also provide key information to better assess reserved rights uses 
and important natural functions in the water. For example, Water Quality 
Guidance for the Great Lakes System identifies minimum water quality standards, 
antidegradation policies, and implementation procedures fot the Gredt Lakes 
System to protect hurnan health, aquatic life, and wildlife.4 
2  Winters v. United States, 207 U.S. 564 (1908). These waters flow from headwaters onto the 
reservation homelands, there is no requirement that the waters must be present only on 
reservation lands. 
3  See, Lac Courte Oreilles v. Voigt, 700 F.2d 341 (7ths Cir. 1983), cert. denied  464 U.S. 805 
(1983) (Tribes reserved hunting, fishing and gathering rights on territories ceded to the United 
States). 
4  See, Water Quality Guidance for the Great Lakes System (Amended September 16, 2011); 40 
CFR Part 132 

Comments on EPA Proposed Clean Water Act Water Quality Standards Regulatoty Revisions to 
Protect Treaty Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022) 
March 6, 2023 
Page 4 of 7 
2. Comments regarding situations where the Band's reserved rights and regulatory 
processes have a significant interaction with the Proposed Rule's methodology for 
deriving water quality standards and dispute resolution 
Since reserved rights are often those that rely on an entire ecosystem, rather than 
bounding designated uses or water quality criteria to a specific location, standards should be 
based on the characteristics of the ecosystem. Some examples where this approach is warranted 
include: stream sections important for fisheries spawning and feeding that are within waters 
subject to state WQS; functional integrity of forested wetlands; and biological corridors and 
wildlife habitat that connect homeland or ceded territory hunting, fishing, and gathering access 
within waters subject to the state WQS. 
Section 1 above briefly describes the interconnected waters that depend on clean water 
from headwaters sources. The following are comments written to help address the sustainable 
use of reserved rights in those waters: 
a. The proposed rule describes three options that states would have to revise their 
WQS to ensure the protection of tribal reserved rights: (a) adopting a designated 
use(s), (b) adopt criteria (numeric and/or narrative); or (c) adopting changes to the 
antidegradation policy. States would have the option of choose which approach 
makes the most sense. However, there are some circumstances that warrant two 
of the three options being implemented to ensure the protection of tribal reserved 
rights and some circumstances that warrant all three of these options being 
implemented to ensure the protection of tribal reserved rights. An example of this 
type of circumstance is related to manoomin (wild rice) waters. A state may need 
to adopt a manoomin designed use and adopt criteria, such as sulfate, to proteCt 
the manoomin designated use and then adopt changes to their antidegradation 
policy and procedures to protect high quality waters where the current 
background levels of sulfate is substantially below the threshold of a sulfate 
criterion to prevent the pollution of sulfate up to that threshold. Tribal input 
should be considered when deciding the changes to the state's WQS necessary to 
ensure the protection of tribal reserved rights. The final rule should reflect that the 
preferred avenue for states to protect tribal reserved rights is by adopting all 
necessary options--whether designated uses specific to tribal reserved rights, 
narrative or numeric criteria, or antidegradation policy changes—to be adequately 
and fully protective. An example of a similar approach is the Marengo River 

Comments on EPA Proposed Clean Water Act Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to 
Protect Treaty Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022) 
March 6, 2023 
Page 5 of 7 
Watershed Partnership Project, and the effort integrating state and Tribal water 
quality assessments.5 
b. Additional language should be included in the final rules specifying the 
considerations for determining water quality standards. According to the 
indigenous understanding of the Ojibwe, we historically use animals in our 
materials, tools and implements, canoes, decorative items, and paints and dyes, 
demonstrated in part through development of ethnohistory work and Ojibwe 
language work. For example, even outside observers of our culture were able to 
recognize that we depend upon the "complete inventory of species for [our] 
security,"6  and, indeed, our interlocking use of all resources."7 
Ojibwe language tends to wrap up many ideas into a word and involves a highly 
developed vocabulary for discussing particular activities, such as fishing methods, 
as well as more complex and abstract notions, such as the technology of maple 
sugar processing or the concepts of Ojibwe religion and other areas of cultural 
importance.8  Often, there are no English equivalents for Ojibwe words or 
expressions. 
Protecting sensitive information such as ethnohistory work and Ojibwe language 
uses around specific sites must be a final rule requirement. As noted in other 
comments letters, Federal agencies are asking for information about gathering, 
protecting and applying Indigenous Knowledge to Federal rulemaking.9  The final 
rule should incorporate those processes to increase consistency. 
s Marengo River Watershed Partnership Project Watershed Action Plan, Sec. 2.14.3 Integrating State And 
Tribal Water Quality Assessments Pp 64 - 80 
file:///CJUsers/admin/Downloads/Marengo Watershed-Plan.pdf 
6  In addition to court decisions, other sources documenting the natural resources uses in Ojibwe 
life include: Charles E. Cleland, Preliminary Report of the Ethnohistorical Basis of the Hunting, 
Fishing and Gathering Rights of the Mille Lacs Chippewa, in Fish in the Lakes, Wild Rice, and 
Game in Abundance (McClurken et al. eds, 2000) at 8 [hereinafter Cleland Report} 
'Id., at 9. 
2  See John D. Nichols, The Translation of Key Phrases in the Treaties of 1837 and 1855, in 
McClurken et al. eds, note 6, at 515. 
See, https://www.whitehouse.goviwp-content/uploads/2022/12/OSTP-CEQ-IK-Guidance.pdf 

Cotnrnents on EPA Proposed Clean Water Act Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to 
Protect Treaty Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022) 
March 6, 2023 
Page 6 of 7 
c. Separate frorn 2.h. above, Federal guidelines regarding public interest review 
require due consideration be given to the effect Federal rulemaking will have on 
historic properties and archaeological resources, including Native American 
religious and cultural sites. 
d. The final rule should include dispute resolution for when states and tribes 
disagree, and, under our comment requiring EPA rulemaking, whether tribal 
reserved rights apply in waters subject to state WQS, the nature of those rights 
and where they apply, and then minimum standards for water quality standards to 
protect reserved rights. We recommend that EPA review how changes to 40 C.F.R. 
Sec. 131.7 could best resolve disputes. 
Sincerely, 
/s/ 
Michael Wiggins Jr. 
Chairman 
Attch: Reservation and Watershed with Mapped Watercourses 

Legend 
C=  Bad River Reservation Boundary 
County Boundary (WI) 
state Boundary 
I=1 
Bad River Watershed 
I 
1 
cl 
i 
! 0 
i 
4, S / 
__ 
0 
4 
8 
16 
24, 
32 Wes-
Comments on EPA Proposed Clean Water Act Water Quality Standards Regulatoty Revisions to 
Protect Treaty Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022) 
March 6, 2023 
Page 7 of 7

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0282 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
1 
 
March 6, 2023 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
Submitted via regulations.gov 
Re: Docket EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, 87 Fed. Reg. 74,361 (Dec. 5, 2022) 
To Whom It May Concern: 
On behalf of the Ridges to Riffles Indigenous Conservation Group (R2R) and the Natural 
Resources Defense Council (NRDC), please accept the following comments on the 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed rule titled, “Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions To Protect Tribal Reserved Rights.” We appreciate the opportunity to 
provide our perspective on the proposed rule and support EPA’s effort to ensure that it and states 
carry out their Clean Water Act (CWA) responsibilities concerning the establishment, review, 
and enforcement of water quality standards that, as required by well-established legal principles, 
protects tribal reserved rights. EPA has a trust obligation to protect tribal trust resources, an 
obligation not shared by the state, and through this rule, EPA should ensure it develops national 
standards that do not provide states space or authority to diminish the full scope of the Tribes’ 
reserved rights.  
R2R is a conservation organization that supports the natural and cultural resources Indigenous 
government and peoples rely on for their economic, spiritual, and cultural identities. R2R 
partners with Tribes on fisheries and water issues on the Klamath River and advocates for state 
and federal regulatory policies that protect Tribal trust resources, much like EPA’s proposed rule 
here does. Of critical importance to R2R are water policies and standards that allow fishery 
populations to recover after decades of harmful state and federal management practices. 
NRDC works to safeguard the earth—its people, its plants and animals, and the natural systems 
on which all life depends. NRDC has U.S. offices in Washington, D.C., New York City, San 
Francisco, Chicago, Santa Monica, and Bozeman and has more than three million members and 
online activists. 

 
 
2 
 
Generally, we believe the proposed rule properly implements how the water quality standards 
program in the CWA should interact with the reserved rights held by Tribes in waters for which 
states (and Tribes with “treatment as a state” status) are responsible for establishing standards. 
We urge the agency to finalize a rule that provides the strongest possible protections for reserved 
rights, recognizing that tribal reserved rights require additional safeguards beyond the baseline 
that states might otherwise establish under the Clean Water Act.  
Below, we respond to specific issues the EPA requests comment and share additional thoughts 
on the proposed rule. 
 
1. In addition to “the rights to fish; gather aquatic plants; and to hunt for aquatic-dependent 
animals,” are there other kinds of rights that water quality standards should account for? 
The rule and water quality standards should account for tribal water rights that include 
agricultural and domestic purposes. For some contaminants, it is likely that fish consumption or 
other uses will be the most sensitive and human health criteria in support of those uses will be 
the strictest. However, if tribal reserved rights encompass agricultural purposes, or, if particular 
contaminants threaten rights-holders' agricultural activities but not human health in a particular 
area, water quality standards should be established in a way that fully protects those rights as 
well. For example, the Navajo Nation’s experience in response to the Gold King Mine spill 
shows the importance of clean water for economic and domestic needs, where Navajo irrigators 
were unable to farm after polluted water contaminated their fields.  
Similarly, water quality standards must protect the exercise of reserved rights that include a 
waterbody’s use as a drinking water source or source for aquatic resources used in cultural or 
ceremonial practices. Thus, the scope of a reserved right must account for the Tribe’s use of 
water to support the full breadth of water needs to make the reservation a homeland. See In re 
Gen. Adjud. of All Rights to Use Water in Gila River Sys. & Source, 35 P.3d 68, 79-80 (Ariz. 
2001).  
2. Should water quality standards be established to protect the “unsuppressed” exercise of 
the right? 
EPA proposes that states and Tribes with “treatment as a state” status, when setting and 
implementing water quality standards, ensure that such standards protect the “unsuppressed” 
exercise of reserved tribal rights. The proposal likewise would apply to EPA’s role in reviewing 
and approving or disapproving standards. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378 (proposed 40 C.F.R. 
§131.9(a)(1)). The preamble to the rule explains that the reference to the “unsuppressed” 
exercise of the right “is intended to address situations where existing water quality is lower than 
necessary to allow for right holders to fully exercise their reserved rights.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74,368. We fully support this requirement as it upholds the EPA’s duty to protect tribal trust 
resources and reserved rights. 

 
 
3 
Neither the scope of a Tribe’s reserved rights nor the conditions supporting that right can be 
diminished by the past and present environmental failure to protect the right.  Even if current 
conditions prevent the full exercise of a Tribe’s reserved right, Tribes are entitled to the full 
enjoyment of the right and the rule must reflect the unsuppressed right. At a minimum, that 
means water quality standards must be established in a way that does not incorporate currently 
suppressed exercise of the right due to poor water quality. We also believe that those standards 
should be reflective of the full exercise of the right as it was established, and thus disagree with 
EPA’s suggestion in the preamble to the proposal that states and EPA can establish and approve 
standards that set as their endpoint something less than a Tribe’s full use of the right: 
EPA is not proposing to require WQS to be established for every waterbody subject to a 
reserved right to protect the waterbody condition that existed at the time a reserved right 
was established. *** [T]he regulation is intended to result in WQS that protect reasonably 
anticipated future uses, taking into account factors that may have substantially altered a 
waterbody. 
87 Fed. Reg. at 74,366-67.  
This caveated approach introduces significant uncertainty into the process of reflecting reserved 
rights into water quality standards and invites conflict between states, the EPA, and Tribes. We 
anticipate disagreements over what is a “reasonably anticipated future use,” whether a water 
body has been “substantially altered,” and whether or to what degree current conditions reflect 
suppression effects or a water body alteration (for instance, temperature changes in a river could 
be affected by both discharges and physical alterations, to the detriment of cold-water fish 
populations).  Further, we are concerned that states and EPA will use this language to allow a 
less-than-full exercise of the right to persist indefinitely and, indeed, be incorporated into law as 
the ultimate goal for the water body.  
To properly protect tribal reserved rights, water quality standards must be based on the full 
exercise of the relevant right, not diminished by present impediments to achieving it arising from 
alterations to the water body. Setting standards that reflect the fully unsuppressed exercise of the 
right would mean that long-term planning for the watershed (such as total maximum daily loads) 
and restoration efforts (such as those in nonpoint source management programs) would consider 
ways to potentially mitigate the current impairment of the right and achieve properly established 
water quality standards. The language of the proposed regulation, in contrast to the preamble 
discussion quoted above, is more consistent with this kind of approach. See 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74,378 (proposed 40 C.F.R. §131.9(a)(1)) (“water quality standards must, to the extent supported 
by available data and information, be established to protect … [t]he exercise of tribal reserved 
rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent 
resource” (emphasis added)). 
3. Are there unique sources of information that states should consider in establishing the 
level of needed water quality? 
EPA seeks comment on whether water quality standards to vindicate tribal reserved rights should 
be based on information apart from sources that have historically been considered in the routine 

 
 
4 
process of state-developed standards, namely: “fish consumption rate surveys, studies or 
accounts of heritage fish consumption rates, peer-reviewed articles or reports on the types and 
levels of pollutants that can adversely affect the resource in question, and monitoring data 
reflecting historic and/or current water quality.” 84 Fed. Reg. at 74,368. EPA must also consider 
Indigenous Knowledge that rights-holding Tribes can offer that are relevant to the both the uses 
encompassed within the tribal reserved right and the level at which water quality criteria must be 
set in order to safeguard those uses. Because it can be resource intensive to collect some of the 
kinds of information EPA identifies and because Tribes uniquely possess information about their 
exercise of reserved rights, the agency must not require water quality standards to be based only 
on the ordinary sources of information usually considered or give such information greater 
weight in the establishment of water quality standards protecting reserved rights.  
As this administration has recognized, incorporating Indigenous Knowledge in federal decision-
making is essential: 
Indigenous Knowledge is a valid form of evidence for inclusion in Federal policy, 
research and decision making. Indigenous Knowledge and other forms of knowledge do 
not depend on each other for validation, and each system can support the insights of the 
other. 
Office of Science & Technology Policy & Council on Environmental Quality, “Guidance for 
Federal Departments and Agencies on Indigenous Knowledge,” at 4 (Nov. 30, 2022), 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/12/OSTP-CEQ-IK-Guidance.pdf. At the 
same time, federal agencies must recognize legitimate concerns that Tribes may have with 
sharing information with the federal government and states:  
Agencies should also understand that Tribes and Indigenous Peoples may carefully guard 
information about their homelands and cultural connections to them. Recognizing and 
respecting divergent processes and world views, and the sensitivity of Tribes about 
sharing certain information about them, is important for relationship building and 
understanding how to appropriately engage with Indigenous Knowledge. 
Id. at 11 (footnote omitted). To address these issues, this administration’s policy is that 
“Agencies should consider co-management, collaborative management, and co-stewardship of 
lands and waters as opportunities to include Tribal Nations, Indigenous Peoples, and Indigenous 
Knowledge in Federal actions.” Id. at 12. In the context of water quality standards-setting, that 
means EPA should seek to collaborate with Tribes in all aspects of the process, and particularly 
with respect to the information that will be used to develop, review, and approve or disapprove 
standards. 
4. Should states have the option to accommodate tribal reserved rights in their water quality 
standards in the manners EPA suggests? 
EPA proposes to allow states to choose between, or combine, different options for protecting 
tribal reserved rights within their water quality standards. Specifically, EPA’s proposal would 
allow states to address tribal reserved rights entirely through state antidegradation requirements, 

 
 
5 
or entirely through designated uses and water quality criteria, or by using both. 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74,371-72 & 74,378 (proposed 40 C.F.R. §131.9(c)). EPA should require states to use both 
methods and should require that designated uses specific to reserved rights be identified, along 
with criteria set at a level to protect those uses.  
Having designated uses and related water quality criteria specifically tied to tribal reserved rights 
is preferable because it enables Tribes to focus on aspects of the water quality standards 
establishment, review, and approval/disapproval process that directly impact their rights.  
Additionally, antidegradation requirements must apply to all waters of the United States within 
the state, including those subject to tribal reserved rights. In that connection, however, we are 
concerned that reserved rights may not be adequately protected by one of the options EPA 
proposes, which would allow the degradation of high quality waters upon a finding “that such a 
lowering is necessary to accommodate important economic or social development in the area in 
which the waters are located.” 40 C.F.R. §131.12(a)(2)(ii). This approach should be allowed only 
if Tribes expressly agree that waters in which they have reserved rights will be adequately 
protected by this degree of antidegradation protection. 
5. Should water quality standards be set at levels designed to ensure that rights-holders do 
not experience risks greater than that of the general public? 
EPA proposes requiring standards be set in a way that ensures reserved rights holders do not face 
greater risks than others in the state. We support this proposal. For instance, as EPA 
acknowledges, in the case of carcinogenic contaminants in fish, water quality standards would 
need to account for increased fish consumption rates of rights-holders to calculate lifetime cancer 
risk and establish criteria for waters in which reserved rights are held such that rights-holders’ 
cancer risk doesn’t exceed whatever level (e.g., a 1-in-a-million risk) people in the general 
population of the state – with lower exposure rates – experience.  
EPA also seeks comment on whether there might be other situations where this provision could 
apply. To the extent EPA is asking whether it should apply more broadly than cancer risk from 
fish consumption, it obviously should, and we believe the proposed regulatory language is 
inclusive of more than that specific situation. See 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378 (proposed 40 C.F.R. 
§131.9(a)(2)) (“water quality standards must... be established to protect … [t]he health of the 
right holders to at least the same risk level as provided to the general population of the State.”). 
In keeping with this provision, standards must protect against all other health harms associated 
with rights-holders exercise of reserved rights, such as acute and chronic non-cancer harms from 
fish consumption or other exposures (if, for example, rights holders have additional physical 
contact with the water than the general population and are at greater risk of exposure to 
pathogens). 
6. How should EPA deal with information gaps or conflicting information?  
In circumstances where there is uncertainty or disagreement about the necessary water quality to 
support tribal reserved rights, EPA proposes to use its usual approach of assessing what the “best 

 
 
6 
available information” indicates. EPA requests comment on whether to use a different approach 
in the case of water quality standards to protect reserved rights. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,371.  
This is an area in which EPA’s leadership is critical – the agency must consult with Tribes and 
obtain tribal agreement on the level of protection necessary to fully secure their rights. As 
discussed above, in cases where Indigenous Knowledge may bear on the scope of the right or the 
stringency of standards needed to secure that right, EPA must collaborate with Tribes in carrying 
out its CWA duties. Additionally, as EPA observes, the federal government’s trust responsibility 
to Tribes requires that laws be construed in their favor; we believe that means that gaps or 
conflicts in information about the scope or stringency of rights-based standards should be 
resolved by deferring to Tribes’ understanding, or, in the absence of information, by acting 
cautiously to avoid allowing pollution or other degradation that would impair the full exercise of 
the reserved right. 
7. Should and, if so, how should states be allowed to employ a use attainability analysis to 
revise designated uses that protect reserved rights? 
EPA seeks comments on whether to authorize states to revised designated uses, following a use 
attainability analysis that finds it is not currently “feasible” to attain the use due to one of six 
different regulatory criteria. 87 Fed. Reg at 74,372 (citing 40 C.F.R. §131.10). In a word, no. 
In the case of water quality standards to protect tribal reserved rights, designated uses and the 
water quality criteria established to protect such uses are a manifestation of that underlying right, 
and they cannot be revised unilaterally by states, especially based on some of the criteria that the 
existing regulations permit to be used. See, e.g., 40 C.F.R. §131.10(g)(6) (authorizing removal of 
use if “[c]ontrols more stringent than those required by sections 301(b) and 306 of the Act would 
result in substantial and widespread economic and social impact”); id. § 131.10(k)(3) 
(authorizing removal of use without use attainability analysis if it is “a non-101(a)(2) use”).  
Should a Tribe with reserved rights expressly agree that a particular designated use is not 
necessary to effectuate the right, however, we believe that it would be appropriate to allow such 
a revision.  
8. Should general regulatory requirements concerning water quality standards, including 
variances and permit compliance schedules apply to standards protecting reserved rights? 
EPA should not permit states to deviate from the water quality standards requirements that 
protect reserved rights absent tribal agreement with any change. However, we do not object to 
including a provision in these regulations that allows the use of general state policies – e.g., 
mixing zones, see 40 C.F.R. § 131.13, variances for permittees or particular waters, see id. 
§131.14, and compliance schedules for water quality-based effluent limits in National Pollutant 
Discharge Elimination System permits, see id. §131.15 – under strict conditions, namely, only 
when the state has consulted with Tribes whose rights will be impacted, obtained written consent 
from such Tribes, and has implemented reasonable conditions as requested by the tribal rights 
holder.   
 

 
 
7 
Again, thank you for considering these comments in your process to develop a final rule. As 
tribal advocates, we support EPA’s work on this proposed rule and urge EPA to ensure the full 
scope of a Tribe’s reserved rights are protected through existing and future water quality 
standards.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0290 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Filed Electronically  
 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
Jennifer Brundage 
Office of Water, Standards 
and Health Protection Division 
Environmental  Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
Re: 
Docket ID NO. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
On behalf of the Tribal Council of the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the 
Flathead Reservation (CSKT or Tribes), please accept these comments in support of the 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed revisions to the Federal Clean Water Act 
water quality standards (WQS) regulation.  The Tribes strongly support the EPA’s proposal to 
clarify and prescribe how WQS must protect aquatic and aquatic-dependent Tribal trust and 
treaty resources. See 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022). 
Our people have recognized the importance of protecting water and water-related 
resources for millennia.  As such we are uniquely qualified to provide these comments. Indeed, 
no natural resource is more vital to our people than water.  It is woven into all aspects of our 
lives. For thousands of years, the Bitterroot Salish, Kootenai, and Upper Pend d’Oreille, thrived 
in our aboriginal homeland situated in what is now Montana, Idaho, Washington, Wyoming and 
British Columbia, subsisting off of healthy native fisheries, plants, and wildlife.  
Under the 1855 Treaty with the Flathead, Etc. (Hellgate Treaty) 12 Stat. 975, the Tribes 
ceded over 20 million acres of our aboriginal territory and reserved a permanent homeland on the 
1.3 million-acre Flathead Reservation in western Montana.  The southern half of Flathead Lake 

2 
 
is included within the Flathead Reservation and is the largest natural freshwater lake west of the 
Great Lakes. The Tribes’ ownership of the bed and banks of Flathead Lake was upheld in 
Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reservation v. Namen, 665 F.2d 951 
(9th Cir. 1982), cert. denied, 459 U.S. 977 (1982).  Under the Hellgate Treaty, the United States 
guaranteed the Tribes that the Flathead Reservation would be set aside for our “exclusive use and 
benefit.”  “[T]he Reservation was a natural paradise for hunting and fishing.” Conf. Salish and 
Kootenai Tribes v. United States, 437 F.2d 458, 478 (Ct. Cl. 1971). 
Through Article 3 of the Hellgate Treaty, the Tribes also reserved “the exclusive right of 
taking fish in all the streams running through or bordering said reservation,” and “the right of 
taking fish at all usual and accustomed places . . . .”  State and federal courts have confirmed the 
right of CSKT members to exercise their treaty-reserved rights to hunt, fish, and gather in usual 
and accustomed places throughout the Tribes’ aboriginal territory. 
Despite the promises made, the United States has often failed to live up to the terms of 
the Hellgate Treaty including diminishing the Tribal land base by opening the Flathead 
Reservation to non-Indian homesteading and allotment of Tribal lands, constructing massive 
irrigation systems on Reservation lands that contaminate and dewater our streams and native 
fisheries and fish habitat, and sanctioning unmeasurable damages to water and water-related 
resources throughout our aboriginal territory.  
For thousands of years our people relied on the fish native to our homelands for 
nutritional and cultural sustenance.  Today, a history of federal actions (or inactions) have led 
once abundant and reliable runs of native fish to be listed under the Endangered Species Act 
(bull trout) or considered for listing (westslope cutthroat trout).  In response, our Tribes have 
undertaken significant and costly efforts to protect the remaining fisheries, restore fish and 

3 
 
wildlife habitat, protect water rights, and improve water quality.  Thus, specific consideration of 
treaty reserved rights in aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources when establishing State (and 
Tribal) Water Quality Standards (WQS) is critical to ensure that the benefit of the bargain our 
ancestors struck with the United States remains intact for future generations. 
Treaty rights are inseparable from the natural environment that Indian tribes rely upon for 
our wellbeing.  As EPA reviews and approves State WQSs, we submit that the law requires that 
the EPA consider the question: “What impacts will these standards have on tribes and on their 
specific treaty rights?”  Such an examination should begin with the fundamental principle that 
Indian tribes’ federally-protected rights to their homelands and to hunt, fish, gather, and pray can 
only be guaranteed when the natural world is healthy and safe enough to sustain those activities. 
Thus, we strongly support the EPA’s effort to amend the WQS regulation to explicitly address 
how WQS must protect tribal reserved rights to aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources.  This 
will ensure a WQS process that is transparent and consistent for all stakeholders. 
Determining if Tribal Reserved Rights Apply 
The EPA requested comments on whether there are additional types of tribal reserved rights 
that should be considered in addition to the right to fish, gather aquatic plants, and hunt for aquatic-
dependent animals.  87 Fed. Reg. 74367 (December 5, 2022).  From our perspective, all the species 
that we fish, hunt, and gather are aquatic-dependent resources.  Thus, in examining WQS standards 
we must consider not only fisheries, but waterfowl and terrestrial species (including plant species) 
that rely on our rivers and waterbodies to survive.    
In addition, we strongly suggest that the right to pray be included as a critical right and 
activity. The exercise of our hunting, fishing, and gathering is inseparable from our rights to 
practice our spiritual beliefs.  See Thompson Smith, Aáy u Sqélix ʷ: A History of Bull Trout and the 

4 
 
Salish and Pend d'Oreille People, EXPLORE THE RIVER: BULL TROUT, TRIBAL PEOPLE, AND THE 
JOCKO 
RIVER, 
Confederated 
Salish 
and 
Kootenai 
Tribes, 
http://fwrconline.csktnrd.org/Explore/ExploreTheRiver/CultureHistory/History/ (accessed March 
2, 2023).  See also City of Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 415 (10th Cir. 1996).  We have prayed 
and used our waters for religious purposes since the beginning of time, and it is important that this 
right be recognized as a use of these waters in setting WQS.  These waters are our churches and 
baptistries and should be acknowledged as such.  
EPA should not require tribes to demonstrate where and how the treaty-reserved right is 
exercised by the right holders.  87 Fed. Reg. at 74367.  EPA should only require tribes to 
demonstrate the nature of the right, in broad geographic terms or in usual and accustomed places 
protected by Treaty.  We do not think it is necessary to ask how the right is exercised as we see no 
relevancy of this question to establishing WQS.  Treaty rights are rights that may be exercised at 
any moment in time by the rights holders; the rights are not dependent on active or continual use, 
and do not disappear or diminish when unexercised.    
However, if the EPA is going to insist on this as a prong of the inquiry, we would reframe 
the question as: “Why is the right being exercised?”  For CSKT and other tribes in the Northwest, 
we have a Treaty right to 50% of the harvestable fisheries species in our usual and accustomed 
places, and we exercise this right both for commercial and subsistence purposes.   We also gather 
other aquatic-dependent resources for subsistence and cultural purposes.  Thus, the inquiry should 
focus on whether the right is used for subsistence, treaty commercial, and/or cultural purposes, and 
not how the right is exercised.  Again, we rely on the waters of our territories for all of these 
purposes and believe that the WQS should be based on an understanding that these activities and 
uses coexist with one another.  

5 
 
Protecting Applicable Reserved Rights 
Determining the Level of Water Quality Necessary to Protect the Right  
We agree with the Preamble’s direction that States and Tribal right holders should establish 
lines of communications to develop WQS that are necessary to protect any aquatic or aquatic-
dependent resources.  Id. at 74368.  This includes working with tribal communities to gather 
accurate data on fish consumption rates, and utilization of aquatic-dependent resources (which 
again includes terrestrial resources and waterfowl), as well as the water itself (this includes not 
only for cultural/religious activities but also uses for activities like tribal fish hatcheries). The 
collaboration between CSKT, the Kootenai Tribe of Idaho (KTOI), Montana, Idaho, and the EPA 
to set the site-specific selenium standards for Lake Koocanusa and the Kootenai River, discussed 
in further detail below, provides a model for how tribes, states, and EPA can work together with 
open communication to develop WQS that will protect tribal reserved rights.  
Accounting for Suppression Effects 
We agree with the change to §131.9(a)(1) that WQS must be established to “protect the 
‘exercise of the tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic 
or aquatic-depended resource.’”  We also endorse the Preamble’s direction that States work with 
right holders to gather information about unsuppressed uses.  Id. at 74369.  This is consistent with 
the federal government’s elevation of Traditional Ecological Knowledge in its decision making.   
The Clark Fork River provides an example where WQS should not be suppressed by poor water 
quality.  As noted in our comments during consultation at the initiation of this rulemaking, the 
Clark Fork River just south of the Flathead Reservation near Missoula is within the Tribes' 
ancestral territory and is one of the usual and accustomed places where tribal members have a right 
to take fish. Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes, Consultation Comments, Sept. 9, 2022, 

6 
 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-09/Confederated-Salish-Kootenai-Tribes-
comments.pdf.  However, due to poor water quality and the presence of dioxins, furans, and PCBs, 
there is a fish consumption advisory for all fish species for a 148-mile stretch on the Clark Fork 
River.  Id.  Obviously, the right to take fish necessarily implies the right to eat that fish.  When 
tribal members cannot eat fish that they catch from the usual and accustomed places, the Tribes’ 
reserved treaty right to do so is clearly diminished.  Water quality on the Clark Fork must be 
improved so that our tribal members can exercise their treaty rights to take fish.  This will 
inevitably require more stringent WQS to clean up the river, and we urge the EPA to set WQS in 
the Clark Fork and other waters where tribes have treaty reserved rights that fully recognize and 
protect these rights.  
The Montana and Idaho selenium standard for Lake Koocanusa and the Kootenai River 
provides an example of a WQS that was not suppressed by poor water quality and will protect 
tribal reserved rights if enforced.  The transboundary waters of the Kootenai and Elk River 
systems, including Lake Koocanusa, have sustained our people since long before the imposition 
of international borders and have not only provided drinking water and critical foods, but also are 
critical to our cultural and traditional practices, community, transportation, and economic 
livelihood.  Selenium and nitrate contamination from over a century of open-pit coal mining in 
British Columbia has already damaged the integrity of these transboundary and traditional waters 
and threatens to cause irreparable harm.  Fish from the Elk River, Lake Koocanusa, and the 
Kootenai River exceed selenium toxicity thresholds for fish health, and data from KTOI and 
CSKT demonstrate that selenium has caused reproductive deformities in aquatic species in these 
waterbodies, leading to significant population decline over time. Working together with CSKT 
and KTOI, Montana and Idaho set—and EPA approved—the standard for dissolved selenium 

7 
 
concentration of 0.8 ug/L for Lake Koocanusa.  This standard is far more stringent than the 
national standard of 1.5 ug/L, and represents a situation where states and the EPA worked with 
CSKT and KTOI to ensure a standard that would protect tribal treaty resources.  This process, 
though undertaken prior to EPA’s proposal of this current rule, should be seen as a model for 
working with tribes to enact WQS that will protect tribal treaty and trust resources.  Any future 
reconsiderations of the selenium standard for Lake Koocanusa and the Kootenai River must 
follow a similar process and include meaningful and continuous consultation and cooperation 
with CSKT and KTOI.  Furthermore, the Tribes support any and all efforts by the federal 
government to improve water quality in the Clark Fork, Lake Koocanusa, the Kootenai River, 
and anywhere within our ancestral territory, in recognition of the federal government’s trust 
responsibility and Treaty obligations to CSKT.   
Protecting Right Holders to the Same Risk Level as the General Population 
We also endorse the proposed rule treating tribal members’ exercise of reserved rights as 
a distinct, identifiable class of individuals holding legal rights to resources, whose reserved rights 
are unique to them and have a defined geographic scope.  Id. at 74370.  This is critically important 
for deriving the human health water quality criteria and other purposes.  With regard to the human 
health criteria, the reservation of usual and accustomed fishing under our Treaty evidences the 
critical importance of fish in our diets and should be accounted for in the criteria.  Furthermore, 
tribal fishers/members often consume more and different fish (such as various species of bottom-
feeding suckers), consume different parts of the fish, and prepare and cook fish in different ways, 
all of which likely expose tribal fishers/members to higher levels of toxins in fish and thus 
necessitate more stringent criteria than for other fishers to assure fish are safe for tribal members 
to consume.  In addition, the criteria should account for other risk factors that put tribal members, 

8 
 
as an identifiable class, at a higher risk for diabetes, cancer, and other health conditions.  Thus, the 
change to §131.9(a)(2) is vital to ensuring that WQS are based on actual data regarding the use of 
the water and aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources by tribal right holders, as well as the 
recognized health risk factors that exist in tribal communities. 
Implementation of These Proposed Requirements. 
In the Preamble, the EPA requests comment on whether there are instances beyond fish 
consumption and protection of wild rice where “WQS may need to be adjusted to protect tribal 
reserved rights consistent with this proposed rulemaking.”  Id. at 74371.  As noted above, there 
are instances beyond fish consumption that necessitate more stringent criteria, in particular the 
commercial harvest and international trade of the resources.  In addition, the consumption and use 
of aquatic-dependent resources, including terrestrial wildlife and aquatic-dependent vegetation, 
which we not only consume, but also use for different cultural activities, can lead to exposure to 
higher levels of toxins through skin absorption of tribal members, and should thus require a more 
stringent criterion.  Finally, we have prayed, exercised our spiritual beliefs, and used the waters in 
our territory for religious purposes since the beginning of time, and we need these waters to be 
available to use for these purposes, as it is vital to our tribal way of life.  This use alone requires 
the most stringent WQS possible.    
EPA requested comment on whether in instances when there is conflicting information, 
gaps in information, or there is a difference of opinion between a state and tribe, if there are other 
factors beyond the best available information to determine that a criterion is “scientifically 
defensible, that EPA should consider in resolving the conflict or disagreement.”  Id. at 74371.  The 
scope of the best available information is critical, therefore state and tribal right holders must have 
a free and frank exchange of information.  In addition, the best available information must include 

9 
 
the Traditional Ecological Knowledge of the tribal people who have used and relied on the 
resources and waters for generations.  This information must be accepted as real data and not be 
viewed as anecdotal unreliable information.  
Options for Establishing WQS to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights  
We agree with the proposed rule designating tribal reserved rights as an explicit designated 
use.  Further, where a use is designated (e.g., fishing), WQS should be established that allow tribal 
people to employ traditional methods in the harvest, preparation, and consumption of those fish. 
For waters where a particular use is not designated, it is important that all tribal reserved rights be 
so designated, for example gathering aquatic or other vegetation, in addition to fishing, and that 
the criteria be adjusted accordingly.  And where a use such as fishing is designated, the criteria 
must be adjusted to ensure tribal member health is protected.  
Regarding the reliance on antidegradation, we agree that it is reasonable that WQS should, 
at a minimum, be established to ensure that the resources are maintained and not further degraded. 
But this must be the floor in setting WQS and not be the ceiling.  Thus, this option cannot exclude 
the other two options, but should be the baseline by which the other two options are implemented. 
We are also concerned with how this option will be implemented in concert with the §131.9(a)(1) 
requirement that WQS be established to protect the exercise of the tribal reserved rights 
unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource.  Id. at 
74368.  Certainly, preventing further damage is critical, but that alone will not be sufficient for 
preserving and restoring tribal reserved rights into the future.  In places where water quality is not 
adequate to protect tribal reserved rights, preventing water quality from deteriorating is not 
enough; efforts must be made to improve water quality such that tribes can safely exercise their 
treaty rights. 

10 
 
We think the proposed rule must be clear that the States will likely need to combine these 
methods to protect tribal reserved rights.  Thus, designating a water body as an outstanding national 
resource waters (ONRW) to prevent further degradation alone is not likely to protect tribal reserved 
rights, and additional designated uses and corresponding criteria will likely be necessary.  
Use Attainability 
The Preamble to the proposed rule requests comment on how States can revise their 
designated uses to ensure compliance with the revised §131.9.  We agree that EPA should not 
modify §131.10 (designated uses), but rather include in §131.9 provisions that specify whether or 
how a State could revise designated uses to protect tribal reserved rights.  
We appreciate the opportunity to provide these comments and support EPA’s efforts to better 
protect the Tribes’ legally protected rights and resources, and thereby uphold the United States’ 
responsibility under treaties, statutes, and Executive Orders to tribes throughout the country.    
 
Sincerely, 
CONFEDERATED SALISH & KOOTENAI TRIBES 
 
 
__________________ 
Tom McDonald 
Chairman

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0273 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
WHITE EARTH RESERVATION 
CHAIRMAN  Michael Fairbanks SECRETARY-TREASURER Michael LaRoque 
DISTRICT I Henry Fox  DISTRICT II Eugene Sommers  DISTRICT III Cheryl "Annie" Jackson 
Ms. Jennifer Brundage 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1301 Constitution Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
RE: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Ms. Brundage, 
Miigwech for the opportunity to comment on the proposed revisions to the water quality standards regulation at 
40 CFR part 131. The White Earth Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe agrees with the Environmental 
Protection Agency ("EPA") that these changes are necessary to ensure that the Clean Water Act will not "be 
construed as ... affecting or impairing the provisions of any treaty of the United States." CWA Section 511(a)(3). 
Water is life, for the Ojibwe people. It is the foundation of the Ojibwe origin and migration story, which 
instructed the Ojibwe people to travel westward to the place where wild rice grows upon the water. Clean and 
abundant freshwater supports the health of current and future generations, and healthy water resources, as 
identified in the proposed rule changes, are critical to sustaining in perpetuity an abundance of aquatic relatives 
that the Ojibwe people have a sacred duty to protect and restore. 
The White Earth Band, along with its sister Ojibwe bands located throughout the Great Lakes Region of the 
United States and Canada, reserved through treaties and equivalent mechanisms rights to hunt, fish and gather on 
tens of millions of acres of ceded territories. See, e.g., below map of ceded territories in Minnesota. However, as 
contemplated in the proposed rulemaking, the White Earth Band's reserved rights have been, in some instances, 
"impaired by water quality levels that limit right holders' ability to utilize their rights." 87 Fed.Reg. 74364. 
Accordingly, the Band applauds the EPA for taking this step to codify the principle long recognized by federal 
courts and the Department of Interior that "to be rendered meaningful, [tribal reserved] rights by necessity [must] 
include some subsidiary rights to water quality." 87 Fed.R.eg. 74364. Both the substantive and procedural changes 
that the agency proposes create a significant opportunity to improve protection for the Band's and other Tribes' 
federally protected property rights. 

bar. 
Reba. 
Slo•••• 
80 Mtts 
0 
20 
40 
Minnes ota Anishinaabe ceded 
territories, reservations, historic 
villages and wild rice waters 
vikg. 
Itmeak 
Itte La. 0.04135.111) 
Carranatasensrical 
Labe) 
1147 
1115 
g 
tefia. 
Ian 
r 111 
licarW 
,— i
 '''''''' 
1  
''' 
" 
'....-- 
L,.r 
' .,,,,,,... L 
'`,........ 
abby
 
4 
.-....' .
:
-11.eS taw 
alms ‘,., 
2_ 
1-4- I ........_, 
%Usk 
, ____I 
.... 
. 
l 
 
i :
--s--
.L.r --
...,  ,,,.. ., i 
m
 
i 
, 
I 
----/ —. --L, 
.1 
l 
Grimed 
Pao 
, aa,aah, 
,moiar 
llovaloa 
Author:Jacob Syverson 
• 
Cram 
Siarees 
Ste. 
Historic Treaty 
Reservations 
1 -Pokeganta 
2 - Sandy Lake 
3 - Rabbit Lake 
4 - Gull Lake 
5 -1Lice Lake 
6 -Greater Leech Lake 
Figure 1: Map of ceded tetritories in Minnesota wherein Ojibwe Bands hold reserved hunting, fishing and 
gathering rights. 
Below, the Band responds to EPA's specific requests for comments within the proposed rulemaking and also 
identifies significant concerns i.e., substantive and procedural aspects of the proposed rulemaking that create a 
substantial risk for undermining the purpose and goals of the proposed rulemaking. 
Specific comments and concerns: 
States should be required to amend all three aspects of their water quality standards (designated uses, 
criteria and antidegradation standards) to provide the most complete protections for Tribes' reserved 
rights. 

In cases where States feel that they have insufficient information to immediately provide for numeric 
criteria to protect reserved rights designated uses, narrative criteria should be immediately implemented. 
-
EPA must ensure that traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) and Indigenous wisdom receive equal 
treatment in determining water quality necessary to protect reserved rights. 
-
EPA's reference to "best available information" creates a risk that states may sideline TEK and 
Indigenous wisdom in determining water quality levels necessary to protect reserved rights. 87 Fed.Reg. 
74371. 
Tribes must be the primary determiners of the necessary balance to be struck in protecting their reserved 
rights. Tribes are, in fact, entitled to seek protection of"the waterbody condition that existed at the time a 
reserved right was established." 87 Fed. Reg. 74366, 74367. However, the Band understands that in some 
cases, this may no longer be achievable. 
The Band agrees that there is a significant risk that insufficient water quality standards may "merely 
reinforce an existing suppressed use that may already limit right holders' ability to exercise their reserved 
rights, or worse, set in motion a "downward spiral" of further reduction/ suppression." 87 Fed.Reg. 
74369. 
The best way to avoid a downward spiral of reserved rights protections is to defer, to the greatest extent 
possible, to Tribes' TEK and Indigenous wisdom regarding conditions necessary to protect reserved 
rights. 
Consultation required to accomplish the goals of the proposed rule revision will likely be extensive and, 
to be sufficient, may require significant delay in states' upcoming triennial reviews. EPA and states 
should prepare for necessary delays required to give force to the proposed rule revisions and not, in the 
name of expediency, delay additional protections for Tribes. 
In many cases, Tribes have not had the capacity or resources to judicially confirm reserved rights in ceded 
territories. In instances where rights in ceded territories have not been judicially confirmed, EPA should 
be prepared to immediately help states and Tribes reach negotiated agreements regarding the existence of 
reserved rights, so that the proposed consultations regarding necessary amendments to water quality 
standards can proceed without delay. 
The White Earth Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe would again like to thank the EPA for taking a critical 
step to address deficiencies in the water quality standaids provision of the Clean Water Act regulations. These 
changes are, indeed, necessary to ensure that treaties are respected as the supreme law of the land, as required by 
Article VI of the United States Constitution. While the proposed draft rule is a laudable first step, meaningful 
implementation will be the true test of whether the proposed rule bears fruit. The Band looks forward to 
forthcoming consultations with EPA and the State of Minnesota and jointly working to ensure the greatest 
possible protection and restoration of water quality and aquatic relatives in ceded territories wherein the Band 
maintains federally protected hunting, fishing and gathering rights. 
Thank you again, Miigwech, 
Michael Fairbanks 
Michael Fairbanks 
ha' ran, 
ite Earth Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe 
J mie K opacky 
nvironmental Counsel, White Earth Band of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe 
P.O. Box 418 I White Earth, Minnesota 56591 I Tel. (218) 983-3285 I Fax (218) 983-3641 
Signature. 
Michael Fair 
çlMar 3, 2023 16.17 CST) 
Email: michaelfairbanks@whiteearth-nsn.gov 

WQS cmt signatory req memo 3-3-2023 
Final Audit Report 
2023-03-03 
Created: 
2023-03-03 
By: 
Laura Erickson (Laura.Thompson@whiteearth-risn.gov) 
Status: 
Signed 
Transaction ID: 
CBJCHBCAABAAyv6UTBUoJWIZfc-xzvbGKe-Cd96bEG-v 
"WQS cmt signatory req memo 3-3-2023" History 
.5  Document created by Laura Erickson (Laura.Thompson@whiteearth-nsn.gov) 
2023-03-03 - 10:06:57 PM GMT- IP address: 209.81.104.42 
r- 
Document emailed to michael.fairbanks@whiteearth-nsn.gov for signature 
2023-03-03 - 10:07:20 PM GMT 
Email viewed by michaellairbanks@whiteearth-nsn.gov 
2023-03-03 - 10:16:17 PM GMT- IP address: 174.255.1.44 
• Signer michael.fairbanks@whiteearth-nsn.gov entered name at signing as Michael Fairbanks 
2023-03-03 - 10:17:04 PM GMT- IP address: 174.199.65.124 
Document e-signed by Michael Fairbanks (michael.fairbanks@whiteearth-nsn.gov) 
Signature Date: 2023-03-03 - 10:17:06 PM GMT - Time Source: server- IP address: 174.199.65.124 
O  Agreement completed. 
2023-03-03 - 10:17:06 PM GMT 
113  Adobe Acrobat Sign

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0270 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
Mr. Michael S. Regan  
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Submitted via https://www.regulations.gov/ 
Re:  
NTWC Comments on Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, Proposed Water 
Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
The National Tribal Water Council (NTWC) submits the following comments to the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on EPA’s proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 (Dec. 5, 2022) (Proposed Rule). 
Introduction 
 
As EPA recognizes, many tribes hold rights to natural and cultural resources that are 
“reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive 
orders, or other sources of Federal law.” Proposed Rule, 87 Fed. Reg. at 74363. The health and 
welfare of tribal members who rely on these vital resources for sustenance and long-standing 
cultural practices are often placed at disproportionate risk because applicable regulatory schemes 
have not recognized or protected tribal reserved rights. Compounding that risk is the fact that most 
tribal reserved rights are located outside Indian country, and thus beyond the reach of tribal 
sovereignty and tribal primacy via the so-called tribal “treatment-as-a-state” (TAS) environmental 
authority that could protect those rights.  
Tribal sovereignty is nonetheless still relevant in these situations, as it exists to protect and 
promote the health and welfare of the tribal community. EPA correctly notes that tribal resources 
use can be “pivotal to the economic well-being of the community,” affecting “the very foundation 
of tribal social and political organizations.” Id. at 74377. Additionally, and of critical importance, 
indigenous peoples have a unique and ancient connection to the natural environment that is central 
to their cultural identity. Because tribes’ cultural self-determination depends on that connection, 
EPA was correct in saying environmental impacts on tribes “may be disproportionate by 
definition.” Id. (emphasis added). In addition, climate change exacerbates such environmental 

NTWC’s Comments on the Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
Page 2 of 12 
 
injustice; tribal reserved rights are “particularly vulnerable” to climate impacts on water quality. 
Id. at 74366. 
NTWC agrees with EPA that ensuring WQS protect tribal reserved rights “is a critical 
component of reducing the impact of climate change on tribes.”1 Id. For reasons stated above and 
others, we see EPA’s Proposed Rule for the first time is taking important steps to protect the 
aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources reserved to tribes by proposing revisions to the federal 
water quality standards (WQS) regulations. EPA explains that “by amending EPA’s WQS 
regulations, rather than addressing [tribal reserved rights] on a case-by-case basis as state WQS 
are submitted for review . . ., EPA is proposing a uniform approach for establishment of WQS 
where tribal reserved rights apply and clearly laying out how EPA will review such WQS.” Id. 
NTWC agrees that incorporating the duty to protect tribal reserved rights into the WQS regulations 
is the best way to achieve clarity, predictability, transparency, and consistency in fulfilling this 
goal. NTWC fully supports this long-overdue initiative.  
 
NTWC also agrees that EPA should interpret this obligation consistent with its 2015 and 
2016 decisions on the Maine and Washington WQS, respectively, as discussed in the Proposed 
Rule, id. at 74365 (n. 34-35 and accompanying text).2  
 
The Idaho WQS process provides a salient example of why the Proposed Rule is 
fundamentally needed. In 2012, the Idaho Department of Environmental Quality (IDEQ) began a 
comprehensive revision of their WQS and corresponding fish consumption rate (FCR). The FCR 
at that time in Idaho was 6.5 grams/day with a 10-6 acceptable cancer risk rate.  Recognizing that 
Idaho’s FCR was inadequate to protect high fish-consuming tribal members, EPA committed to 
work closely with the five Idaho tribes throughout the process. Along with coordinating with the 
Idaho tribes on the Idaho rulemaking process, EPA funded both a contemporary fish consumption 
survey, implementing both food frequency questionnaire (FFQ) and 24-hour recall/National 
Cancer Institute (NCI) methodologies, and historical, unsuppressed fish consumption reports. 
Given that three of the Idaho tribes had completely or nearly lost all access to culturally important 
fish species, only the Nez Perce Tribe (NPT) and Shoshone-Bannock Tribes (SBT) participated in 
the fish consumption survey.  
                                                                 
1 Protecting tribal reserved rights through WQS requirements has a significant bearing on reducing adverse impacts 
of climate change on tribal communities, EPA recognizes. Id. at 74366. However, NTWC thinks the issues raised by 
this relationship are complex enough that they should be addressed separately rather than in these comments. 
NTWC would be glad to work with EPA in the future to explore this connection. 
2 NTWC also agrees with EPA’s interpretation that the treaty, statute, executive order, or other legal instrument 
need not explicitly reference water quality for the reserved right to exist. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74366.  

NTWC’s Comments on the Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
Page 3 of 12 
 
 
Prior to survey initiation, the five Idaho tribes collectively agreed that an updated FCR 
must, at a minimum, be 175 grams/day at 10-6. Once developed and initiated, the survey 
questionnaires asked respondents about seven different fish groupings. The NPT and SBT agreed 
that Group 2 (near-coastal and inland anadromous species) was the most appropriate grouping for 
developing Idaho WQS. At survey conclusion and at the 95th percentile, it was found that the NPT 
consumed 327.9 (FFQ) and 233.9 (NCI) grams/day, respectively. The SBT, at the 95th percentile, 
consumed 427.1 (FFQ) and 80.0 (NCI) grams/day, respectively.   
 
IDEQ advanced a number of policy choices in the rulemaking process that would be used 
in determining final WQS. Those included: 1) who the target population would be, 2) criteria 
calculation (deterministic vs. probability risk assessment (PRA), 3) fish to be included in 
determining a FCR (key being inclusion/exclusion of market and anadromous fish), 4) acceptable 
cancer risk rate, 5) no backsliding in WQS, and 6) downstream waters protection. The Idaho tribes 
were unified on their preferred policy choices and the EPA supported the tribes’ choices in their 
entirety. 
 
Missing from IDEQ’s policy choices were tribal treaty rights and suppression, both 
strongly advocated for by the Idaho tribes and EPA. Neither were factored into IDEQ’s final rule. 
IDEQ determined that tribal treaty rights were an “unresolved issue.” In the Proposed Rule at 
74369 (n. 57), EPA discusses the Idaho process and their lack of authority to require states to 
consider suppression.     
 
Throughout the lengthy rulemaking process, the Idaho tribes and EPA provided hours of 
oral comments and questions and submitted hundreds of pages of written comments to IDEQ. 
Rarely did IDEQ adequately respond to those comments. When the Idaho tribes requested a 
meeting with IDEQ’s Director, with the backing of EPA, that request was denied.  
 
IDEQ’s development of its final rule incorporated not a single preferred policy choice of 
the Idaho tribes and EPA. The highest fish-consuming population (tribes) were not the target 
population. Criteria calculation was based on PRA. Market and anadromous fish were excluded 
from survey results. Acceptable cancer risk rate was reduced to 10-5. There was backsliding in 
updated WQS. Narrative downstream waters protection measures did not protect tribal, Oregon, 
and Washington waters. The final rule, with WQS based on 66.5 grams/day at 10-5, was submitted 
to the EPA on December 13, 2016. Ultimately, EPA approved IDEQ’s final rule on April 4, 2019. 
While EPA strongly supported the Idaho tribes throughout the process, they were hamstrung by 
their own guidance and regulations, leading to their approval of Idaho’s inadequate WQS that do 
not protect tribal reserved rights.   
Comments on Specific Provisions in the Proposed Rule 
 
The key component of EPA’s proposed regulatory initiative is the addition of 40 C.F.R. § 
131.9 to the WQS regulations. That section would require that WQS “protect tribal reserved rights 

NTWC’s Comments on the Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
Page 4 of 12 
 
applicable to the waters subject to such standards.” § 131.9(a); See also § 131.5(a)(9). Moreover, 
the Agency’s revisions to § 131.5 make clear that EPA has the authority and in fact is required to 
disapprove state WQS that do not satisfy this requirement, along with the others listed in existing 
§ 131.5(a)(1)-(8), and must promulgate federal standards that do comply. The NTWC provides the 
following comments and recommendations regarding these provisions and other aspects of the 
proposal to ensure the protection of tribal reserved rights. 
Section 131.3 (Definitions) 
 
NTWC agrees with EPA’s proposed definition of “tribal reserved rights” in new 40 C.F.R. 
§ 131.3(r) as “rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either 
expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of Federal law” 
but with one revision. NTWC suggests that the definition should be prefaced with the words “as 
used in this Part,” or “for purposes of this Part,” because tribal reserved rights are broader than 
aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources. Although those other resources are not likely affected by 
WQS, they are relevant in other contexts outside of these proposed regulations. 
 
For example, the Shoshone-Bannock Tribes, in southeastern Idaho, have rights under the 
ratified Fort Bridger Treaty of 1868 to hunt on all unoccupied lands of the United States, not just 
in or adjacent to water bodies that are covered under the Clean Water Act. Similarly, many tribes 
across the country have treaty rights to gather plants that may not always be found in or adjacent 
to waters of the United States. 
Section 131.5 (EPA Authority) 
 
As previously mentioned, NTWC strongly supports the proposed mandatory requirements 
that WQS must protect tribal reserved rights, § 131.5(a)(9), and that EPA must disapprove WQS 
that do not meet this requirement and promulgate federal standards that do, id. EPA has exercised 
this authority in the past. For example, in 2016 EPA promulgated standards for Washington State 
based on a fish consumption rate of 175 for all contaminates, instead of accepting the state’s 
weaker standards. As noted above, EPA took similar course of action regarding the Maine WQS. 
EPA must continue to follow this practice.  
 
The last sentence of § 131.5(b) appears to backtrack, however, EPA’s obligation to 
promulgate federal WQS, by stating that EPA “may” promulgate new or revised standards. As this 
sentence is surplusage it should be deleted. Alternatively, if it is intended to refer to another 
additional requirement, EPA should clarify what that is and make certain to remove any ambiguity 
about the mandatory nature of EPA’s authority and duty to promulgate new or revised standards.  
Section 131.6 (Minimum Requirements for WQS Submission) 
NTWC generally supports the spirit of EPA’s proposed subsection (g). We note it seems 
odd the first sentence is phrased permissively; that is, information on the scope, nature and current 

NTWC’s Comments on the Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
Page 5 of 12 
 
and past use of tribal rights holders is said to “aid” EPA in evaluating WQS submissions. Shouldn’t 
EPA be required to develop such information, since it is the factual basis for determining in § 
131.9 whether the WQS protect reserved rights? More concerning, perhaps, is the ambiguous 
process suggested by the phrase “as informed by the right holders.” The preamble says this 
“provide[s] a role for right holders” to participate in protecting reserved rights. 
 
In its 1984 Indian Policy, EPA said it would encourage tribes, states, and local governments 
to communicate and cooperate on matters of mutual concern. It is true that many tribes have 
worked cooperatively and productively with states and state subdivisions. There is every reason to 
assume that, particularly in the context of WQS, tribes would want to influence state regulatory 
programs. The sheer number of consultation requests that tribes receive from federal agencies, and 
the relative lack of tribal consultation resources undermine this ideal. In addition, most states and 
tribes have no established consultation protocols, especially in comparison to EPA’s long tribal 
consultation experience. States also lack the legal and political background that helps animate 
federal consultation. 
 
In light of these concerns, it is possible that states will simply rely on their usual public 
participation processes to become “informed’ by right holders, if they comment. Tribes can and 
should participate in notice and comment processes. The regulation here, though, envisions 
genuine discussions between two sovereign governmental entities on a discrete topic with special 
sensitivities. True dialogue requires intentionally designed procedures. 
 
NTWC recommends EPA consider developing or at least suggesting processes for these 
state-tribe exchanges. If they are not productive, tribes will renew their concerns with EPA during 
consultation under § 131.9(b). As noted below, EPA-tribal consultation is important and should 
be retained. At that point in time, however, the state will have already selected criteria and devoted 
resources to supporting it, which puts the burden on the tribe to show the criteria, are inadequate 
rather than the state showing they are adequate. That may also inadvertently set the state and tribe 
up for unnecessary conflict when the spirit of the requirement is clearly to foster respectful and 
genuine engagement. 
 
We have three related recommendations here. The preamble says § 131.6 “provides clarity 
on EPA’s expectations” for “how states must document their efforts to ascertain information.” Id. 
at 74367 (emphases added). The proposed regulatory language, however, is not clear on that point. 
Subsection (g)(1) requires information on the reserved right(s), “informed by the right holders,” 
and (g)(2) requires “methods used to develop the water quality standards.” We recommend 
explicitly requiring that state submissions explain the procedures used to identify and engage right 
holders, describe any substantive suggestions the right holders made that the state did not adopt, 
and explain the state’s justifications for not adopting them. 
 

NTWC’s Comments on the Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
Page 6 of 12 
 
Second, the proposed rule encourages the right holder to provide information and data to 
the state for determining where and how the reserved rights apply, “as informed by the right 
holder.” Id at 74367. The NTWC and tribal leaders recommend that the request for culturally 
sensitive information include procedures for keeping such information confidential. Section 131.6 
(g) should provide that right holders may request certain information about tribal reserved rights 
to be kept confidential, in which case the state and EPA must honor that request. For example, a 
right holder may want to keep the location of a resource confidential, as well as precisely how it 
is used if for a traditional cultural purpose. 
 
Our third recommendation is for this provision to explicitly recognize Traditional 
Ecological Knowledge (TEK) as one method for developing standards protecting tribal reserved 
rights uses. EPA has recognized the value of TEK in other contexts. See TEK in  RCRA/CERCLA 
Cleanup. This addition parallels our suggested addition of TEK in § 131.9(a) below. 
 
Another concern about sharing tribal information and data with the state is that it could be 
used against tribes in court proceedings challenging their reserved rights. For example, in 2016 
tribes in Idaho were hesitant to participate in fish consumption surveys. Tribes feared that if they 
could not demonstrate that they were consuming enough fish (including but not limited to burbot, 
lamprey, salmon, steelhead, and sturgeon), the state could use that fact to claim that the tribes were 
not fully exercising their reserved right.  Tribes do not want their reserved rights adjudicated in 
front of the courts unless they choose to bring such cases. The NTWC recommends that §131.6 
(g) identify language that any shared information or data gathered by a tribe will not be used in a 
manner that limits or challenges the tribe’s reserved rights. 
 
Finally, the proposed rule also does not provide or refer to any resources to assist right 
holders in participating in state WQS revision processes and assumes tribes will be able to provide 
requested information from states or EPA. Many tribes that have reserved rights lack the technical 
and financial capacity to take on added responsibilities to gather, evaluate, and provide the 
necessary information and data that may be requested. The NTWC urges EPA to compensate tribes 
for the costs they accrue in conducting legal review, data compilation and analysis for requested 
reserved right information.  EPA can consider using its discretionary funding to compensate tribes 
for their information-sharing efforts. 
 
Section 131.9 (Protection of Tribal Reserved Rights) 
This proposed provision is the heart of the initiative, and NTWC enthusiastically endorses 
the mandatory language of proposed subsection (a), that WQS “must” protect tribal reserved rights, 
and subsection (c), that WQS “must” designate uses and establish appropriate water quality criteria 
to protect those uses, pursuant to § 131.11. NTWC agrees that this process could involve creating 
a new designated use to protect tribal reserved rights, perhaps called “supports tribal reserved 

NTWC’s Comments on the Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
Page 7 of 12 
 
rights” or simply “tribal reserved rights,” with associated water quality criteria for that use, or 
developing revised criteria to protect the reserved right under an existing designated use, such as 
fishing, for example, so long as the reserved right’s inclusion is explicit and clearly analyzed, or 
both of these options. 
Section 131.9(a) 
 
NTWC supports the proposed requirement in § 131.9(a)(1) that WQS must protect “the 
exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or 
aquatic-dependent resource.” NTWC does not, however, agree with EPA’s proposed interpretation 
of this requirement as being limited to protecting “reasonably anticipated future uses, taking into 
account factors that may have substantially altered a waterbody.” Proposed Rule at 74366-67. 
 
 Although resources may have been more abundant when the reserved rights were 
established, as for example is the case with fishery resources in the Pacific Northwest and in Maine, 
EPA’s limited interpretation is too restrictive: tribes and other interested parties are working 
toward restoration of those resources, including by removing dams along some of the waterbodies, 
and improving fish passage, which are actions that may not have been “reasonably anticipated” 
not so long ago, and which shows that “factors that may have substantially altered a waterbody” 
can be changed (e.g., Penobscot River Restoration Project (nrcm.org).  A similar example is 
provided by tribal efforts in the upper Midwest to restore habitat supporting the growth of wild 
rice. Designating waters for wild rice habitat even if some may claim those waters are not 
“reasonably anticipated” to support it is essential to protecting the resource and tribal reserved 
rights to gather that resource. EPA’s interpretation of this requirement therefore may result in an 
unnecessary diminishment of tribal reserved rights. 
Because NTWC supports requiring WQS to protect unsuppressed tribal reserved rights, 
NTWC also supports adding a provision to § 131.9 requiring the designated use attainability 
analysis in § 131.10 to take this requirement into account. See Proposed Rule at 74372. Otherwise, 
a finding that a designated use protecting tribal reserved rights is not currently feasible under § 
131.10 could undermine EPA’s and the states’ obligations to protect tribal reserved rights and 
essentially negate the core provisions and purpose of § 131.9. Language addressing this issue could 
be added as a fourth criterion under § 131.9(c) or as a new § 131.9(d). Moreover, when restoration 
activities lead to an abundance of fish or other resources subject to tribal reserved rights, designated 
uses should be reviewed and revised if needed to protect these resources. 
NTWC agrees with EPA’s observation that any currently practiced reserved rights are 
“presently attained uses,” that must be treated as designated uses pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 131.10(i), 
and therefore require criteria for protection under 40 C.F.R. § 131.12(a)(1). See 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74370, 74372. 
EPA appropriately recognizes the sad reality that historical land uses have suppressed the 

NTWC’s Comments on the Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
Page 8 of 12 
 
availability of traditional aquatic resources and the water quality needed for their protection, so 
that some tribes can no longer fully exercise their reserved rights at “heritage” rates. Id. at 74368, 
n. 50. Over two decades ago, EPA’s National Environmental Justice Advisory Council raised 
concerns over the “suppression” effect on treaty rights to fish. See FISH CONSUMPTION AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE (NEJAC 2002). NTWC fully supports EPA’s express requirement 
in § 131.9(a)(1) that WQS must protect “unsuppressed” tribal reserved rights. 
We are concerned whether the intention behind the qualification “to the extent supported 
by available data and information” is clear. Logic, and the backdrop of administrative law, support 
an expectation that technical decisions are adequately supported. The specific topic here—heritage 
rates, and locations formerly but no longer used for reserved rights because of contamination and 
degradation—is perfectly supported by TEK. Yet, some might read the data qualification as 
imposing a highly technical bar for setting WQS that protect unsuppressed tribal reserved rights. 
We suggest indicating that “available” is a relatively low threshold, and that TEK is a key piece of 
data/information in determining unsuppressed tribal reserved rights. 
EPA’s suggestion that unsuppressed rights “balance heritage use of a resource with what 
is currently reasonably achievable for a particular waterbody,” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74369, is probably 
the most reasonable accommodation, assuming the intent is to set the level above what is currently 
reasonably achievable. That intent is consistent with the CWA’s goal to “restore and maintain the 
chemical, physical and biological integrity of the Nation’s waters,” CWA § 101(a), and more 
generally with the many restoration themes of modern environmental law like, in the context of 
the CWA, setting MCLs as close as possible to MCLGs, wetlands mitigation ratios, and restoration 
or replacement of aquatic resources injured by hazardous substance releases. 
NTWC fully agrees that tribal citizens exercising reserved rights are “a distinct, identifiable 
class of individuals holding legal rights to resources, whose reserved rights are unique to them and 
have a defined geographic scope.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74370. That unique status, against the backdrop 
of the United States’ long political relations with Indian tribes, clearly “warrants treating them as 
the target population for … deriving human health criteria,” id., rather than as subpopulations of 
highly exposed individuals. 
We support the protection of tribal reserved rights so that the health of tribal members will 
not be subject to any greater risk level than the general population, as provided in § 131.9(a)(2). 
However, in light of the chronic health challenges facing indigenous peoples, the suppression of 
traditional foods and the lack of healthy alternatives, NTWC suggests EPA require the more 
frequently used 10-6 risk level even if the state uses the less stringent 10-5 risk level for the general 
population. Id. at 74369. 
To determine tribal risk levels, EPA and the states should be required to use Native 
American risk analyses when available. The Wabanaki Traditional Cultural Lifeways Exposure 
Scenario (by Harper and Ranco), available on www.epa.gov and used by EPA to derive tribal fish 

NTWC’s Comments on the Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
Page 9 of 12 
 
consumption rates in Maine, is an example. 
In  addition to our suggestion above for more detail on discussions between states and tribal 
right holders, we endorse proposed § 131.9(b)’s provision for EPA consultation, consistent with 
applicable EPA tribal consultation policies, in determining whether state water quality standards 
protect applicable tribal reserved rights in accordance with paragraph (a) of this section. 
We understand EPA’s use of fish consumption rates and water quality necessary for wild 
rice as classic and helpful examples of suppression and differing health criteria. But we decline 
the call for additional specific examples of reserved rights or key aquatic species. Just as EPA 
declines here to set national unsuppressed threshold rates because of situation-specific variation, 
it makes no sense to use this rulemaking as the location for a definitive, comprehensive list of all 
indigenous reserved rights and associated species.  
Finally, the NTWC supports limiting the use of narrative water quality to situations where 
numeric criteria cannot be established or to supplement numeric criteria, per existing § 131.11.  
Proposed Rule at 74368 says, “EPA is available to assist states in gathering more information, in 
coordination with the right holders, for future use” when data and information are not available or 
are inconclusive. To be clear, the NTWC would not support EPA approving a state’s WQS revision 
where existing, technically supported numeric criteria are replaced with narrative criteria, as was 
the case in the state of Minnesota, where it recently revised their Class 3 (Industrial consumption) 
and Class 4 (Agriculture and wildlife) standards for a number of conventional pollutants, in some 
cases withdrawing numeric criteria and replacing them with narrative standards. Minnesota tribes 
objected to this lowering of water quality standards which included protections for Manoomin 
(wild rice, a culturally significant aquatic plant) and wildlife drinking water (including traditional 
subsistence species like moose) under Class 4 standards. Even after government-to-government 
consultation, 
extensive 
technically 
supported written 
comments, 
and testimony 
to an 
administrative law judge, the state adopted their revisions and submitted them to EPA for approval. 
And, despite additional comments and formal consultation, EPA approved those revised standards 
in spite of ample scientifically based evidence as well as expressly communicated tribal objections. 
The CWA and its implementing regulations provide no legal authority for a state to convert clear 
and enforceable numeric standards into subjective narrative standards. The Proposed Rule should 
clearly ensure that aquatic and aquatic-dependent plant and animal species are protected under 
state water quality standards. 
Section 131.9(b) 
Proposed Rule § 131.9(b) provides: “In reviewing  state water quality standards 
submissions under this section, EPA will initiate tribal consultation with the right holders, 
consistent with applicable EPA tribal consultation policies in determining whether state water 
quality standards protect applicable tribal reserved rights in accordance with paragraph (a) of this 
section.” 

NTWC’s Comments on the Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
Page 10 of 12 
 
However, the proposed rule does not define in its tribal consultation process a dispute 
resolution procedure when rights holders disagree with EPA’s conclusions of whether state WQS 
are protective of the tribal reserved rights. The NTWC recommends the proposed rule identify a 
dispute resolution process, under which rights holders can request to meet directly with the EPA 
Administrator to address those disagreements. Additionally, the NTWC recommends that, when 
necessary, the EPA utilize their Conflict Prevention and Resolution Center to mediate and resolve 
disputes.   
 
Section 131.9(c) 
 
 
As previously noted, NTWC supports the requirement in § 131.9(c) that WQS must 
designate uses and establish appropriate water quality criteria to protect those uses, pursuant to § 
131.11. NTWC agrees that this process could involve creating a new designated use to protect the 
tribal reserved right, with associated water quality criteria for that use, or developing revised 
criteria to protect the reserved right under an existing designated use, such as fishing, or both of 
these options. However, NTWC maintains that to protect tribal reserved rights, the antidegradation 
requirements referenced in § 131.9(c)(3) should be required in addition to the designated uses and 
water quality criteria required in § 131.9(c)(1)-(2), not instead of those requirements. In other 
words, the regulatory text should say “and” instead of “and/or” when listing the requirements in § 
131.9(c). The antidegradation options of designating Outstanding National Resource Waters to 
protect tribal reserved rights and of ensuring that any lowering of water quality will continue to 
protect tribal reserved rights (Options 1 and 2 in the Proposed Rule at 74371) can both be used to 
support designated uses and related water quality criteria that protect reserved rights.  
 
Section 131.20 (State Review and Revision of WQS) 
 
NTWC agrees with the inclusion of the new sentence in § 131.20(a) requiring the triennial 
review of WQS to “include evaluating whether there are tribal reserved rights applicable to state 
waters and whether water quality standards need to be revised to protect those rights pursuant to § 
131.9.” However, the only process specified for determining whether the WQS satisfy § 131.9 is 
the public participation required in existing § 131.20(b). Consistent with our comment above that 
EPA should describe processes for right holders to give input on suppressed reserved rights, 
NTWC requests that EPA provide a specific process to ensure that states directly ask for and obtain 
information from right holders as to their reserved rights. States must engage in that process while 
they are reviewing their WQS, rather than leaving it up to EPA to determine whether there are 
tribal reserved rights at issue once the states have already submitted the WQS to EPA for review 
and approval, which is when § 131.9(b) comes into play. 
The NTWC recommends that EPA adopt a process that requires states to contact all tribes 
with treaty protected rights within their borders, meet with them separately from the general public 
hearing provided in § 131.20, and take their input into account when reviewing WQS. In addition, 

NTWC’s Comments on the Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
Page 11 of 12 
 
EPA should require states to notify both the tribe or tribes affected and EPA if the state disagrees 
with the tribe’s claim to a reserved right in a particular resource.  These additions to the regulation 
should be mandatory and stringently enforced by EPA. It must be recognized that treaty rights to 
hunt, harvest, and gather within ceded territories or usual and accustomed places often apply to 
multiple tribes that signed those treaties and may cross state boundaries. This situation may add 
complexity to the consultation requirements for state WQS revisions, and it falls upon EPA to 
ensure that all affected tribes have that consultative opportunity to identify treaty resource use and 
the level of water quality necessary to support it. 
 
Finally, it is common knowledge that the triennial review process does not in fact take 
place every three years. To ensure that a review of WQS takes place in a timely fashion in response 
to these revised WQS regulations, another sentence should be added to § 131.20(a) to require that, 
within two years of the effective date of this rulemaking, all states must review and, if needed, 
revise their WQS to protect tribal reserved rights. These rights, which are protected not only by 
the Clean Water Act, but also by the Constitution, have been neglected far too long. 
Before we conclude, we offer one final suggestion. Like tribes in the “lower 48,” our sisters 
and brothers in Alaska have also waited a long time for attention to reserved rights critical to 
maintaining their sustenance and cultural lifeways. Because of the U.S. Supreme Court’s unilateral 
decision that with a single exception there is no Indian country in Alaska, Alaska v. Native Village 
of Venetie Tribal Government, 522 U.S. 520 (1998), Alaskan tribes arguably have no territory 
over which to implement WQS via the TAS model, and so their aquatic reserved rights are entirely 
subject to state CWA implementation. The federal Alaska National Lands Conservation Act, Pub. 
L. 96-487 (December 2, 1980), set out in detail the federal subsistence rights of Alaska Natives, 
which include aquatic resources. Nothing in the proposed rule excludes Alaska from its important 
requirements. Nonetheless, Congress’ different legal treatment of Alaska tribes may lead some to 
assume that Alaska is exempt from this new rule protecting tribal reserved rights. EPA should 
prevent such assumptions from the beginning by explicitly stating that the rule applies to Alaska 
WQS.  
Conclusion 
EPA has long distinguished itself as the leading federal agency embracing tribal 
sovereignty and environmental self-determination. The boldness of this proposal in r e q uir i n g  
t he  p r o t e c t io n of aquatic environmental conditions able to support the full exercise of tribal 
reserved rights follows nearly 50 years of creative and innovative administrative mechanisms 
helping protect the cultural survival of the nation’s indigenous peoples. Those efforts chart a 
consistent course of action implementing EPA’s ground-breaking Indian Policy, discharging the 
federal 
government’s 
trust responsibilities 
to tribes, and addressing 
the longstanding 
environmental justice challenges in Indian country. In fact, and despite the United States’ initial 
hesitation in supporting it, the proposed rule helps implement the United Nations Declaration on 

NTWC’s Comments on the Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
Page 12 of 12 
 
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, A/RES/61/295 (2 Oct. 2007), which recognizes indigenous 
peoples’ human rights to “[p]ractice [sic] and revitalize their cultural traditions and customs,” id 
Art. 11, § 1, and “[m]aintain and strengthen their distinctive spiritual relationship with their 
traditional lands, territories, waters and other resources,” id Art. 25. 
We trust EPA takes into account the information and recommendations provided in this 
letter to strengthen the Agency’s effort requiring that WQS regulations protect tribal reserved 
rights. 
Sincerely, 
 
Ken Norton, Chairman 
National Tribal Water Council 
 
Cc: Karen Gude, EPA Office of Water 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Northern Arizona University 
PO Box 15004 
Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5004 
Elaine H. Wilson, NTWC Project 
Manager 
928-523-9555 office 
928-523-1266 fax 
nau.edu/itep 
Elaine.Wilson@nau.edu 
480-452-6774 cell

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0239 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Qreat 
Plains 
Tribal Water 
Alliance 
Board of Directors 
Doug Crow Ghost, SRST 
Chairman 
Reno Red Cloud, OST 
Vice Chairman 
Elizabeth Wakeman, FSST 
Secretary 
Mary 1. Gourneau, LBST 
Treasurer 
Syed Hug, RST 
Member 
Submitted via https://www.regulaitons.gov 
March 6, 2023 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington D.C. 20460 
RE: 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 - Comments on Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Dear Madam or Sir: 
I serve as Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Great Plains Tribal Water Alliance, 
Inc. The Tribal Water Alliance serves as a technical advisor to the Great Plains Tribal Chairman's 
Association, to assist in the protection of our Treaty-based reserved water rights. I write to 
comment on the proposed rule on Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights. (87 Fed. Reg. 74361-74379, Dec. 5, 2022). 
Our comments will focus on the following: 
(1)
The proposed rule has been developed without prior and meaningful Nation-to-
Nation consultation with the affected Tribes; 
(2)
The proposed rule could adversely affect Treaty-based water rights, by conferring 
a role upon the states in identifying the existence and scope of reserved rights; and 
(3)
The EPA should initiate a collaborative dialogue with the Great Plains Tribes and 
throughout Indian Country prior to finalizing the proposed rule. 
The Proposed Rule Suffers from a Lack of 
P.O. Box 271 
www.tribalwateralliance.orq 
Pine Ridge, SD 57770 

Early and Meaningful Nation-to-Nation Consultation 
The Tribal Water Alliance has consistently emphasized the need for government agencies 
such as EPA to fully consult on a Nation-to-Nation basis, when undertaking actions affecting trust 
resources. This includes what the proposed rule characterizes as "reserved rights." Accordingly, 
the EPA is obligated to engage in early, meaningful and collaborative consultations with the Indian 
nations prior to enactment of the proposed rule. This is mandated under Executive Order 13175 on 
Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments (65 Fed. Reg. 67249 (Nov. 9, 
2000), President Biden' s Memorandum on Tribal Consultation and Strengthening Nation-to-
Nation 
Relationships, 
(https ://www.wh i te h o u se. gov/bri efing-room/presi denti al - 
actions/2021/01/26/memorandum-on-tribal-consultation-and-stren gtheni n a-nation-to-nation-
relationships) and EPA's Indian Policy. 
It does not appear that has occurred. A federal register notice inviting public comment and 
a webinar do not constitute meaningful consultation as required in E.O. 13175 and its 
implementing presidential memoranda and policies. EPA should take no further action on the 
proposed rule, prior to engaging in a meaningful effort to collaborate with the affected Tribal 
Nations on this rule. 
The Proposed Rule may Adversely Impact Indian Reserved Water Rights 
We are concerned with the potential impact any final rule would have on the reserved water 
rights of the Great Plains Tribes. Our water rights were implicitly reserved in our Treaties with 
the United States. For the Tribes represented on our Board of Directors, the 1851 Fort Laramie 
Treaty and 1868 Fort Laramie Treaties are especially relevant. Under these Treaties, the Sioux 
Nation retains Treaty rights to approximately 40 million acres in the Great Plains. Present-day 
Reservation lands in the Great Plains Region encompass nearly 14 million acres. 
(https://www. bia.gov/regional-offices/great-plains/agenc i es). 
Consequently, our reserved water rights are extensive. The proposed rule could adversely 
affect our reserved water rights, because it incorporates the states into the process of identifying 
the waters in which our rights exist. Accordingly, there may be unintended consequences that 
could minimize or diminish the reserved water rights of the Great Plains Tribes. 
Our reserved water rights in the Great Plains are generally unquantified. They have not 
been defined with specificity through an adjudication or compact. The proposed rule "would 
require states to evaluate whether there are applicable tribal reserved rights relevant to waters 
subject to the state's WQS during the public triennial review process." (87 Fed. Reg. 74367). 
Thus, it contemplates that the states will have a role - a say - in which water bodies Tribes possess 
reserved rights to, and the extent of those rights. 
The Great Plains states represent non-Indian water interests that conflict with the reserved 
rights of the Tribes. As explained by the United States Supreme Court, 
P.O. Box 271 
www.tribalwateralliance.orq 
Pine Ridge, SD 57770 

These Indian tribes... owe no allegiance to the States, and receive from 
them no protection. Because of the local ill feeling, the people of the States 
where they are found are often their deadliest enemies. 
(United States v. Kagama, 118 U.S. 375, 383-384 (1886)). 
The proposed rule confers an inappropriate role to the states for the identification of Tribal 
reserved rights. The proposed section 131.6(g) would require states to submit "information about 
the scope, nature, and current and past use of the tribal reserved rights, as informed by the rights 
holders." (87 Fed. Reg. 74378). It is not the role of the states to determine the nature and extent 
of Tribal Treaty rights. The EPA should not promulgate the proposed subsection (g) in the current 
form. 
The preamble states, "EPA strongly encourages... rights holders to proactively share such 
information with states and EPA." (87 Fed. Reg. 74369). The EPA assumes that Tribes will 
willingly communicate information to the agency and to the states relating to reserved rights. That 
assumption may be erroneous. Tribal reserved rights, including water rights, are Often challenged 
by states and local interests. (E.g. Charles Carvell, Indian Reserved Water Rights: Impending 
Conflict or Coming Rapprochement Between the State of North Dakota and North Dakota Indian 
Tribes, 85 U.N.D. L. Rev. 1 (2009)). 
A prominent Tribal leader explained, 
Our water requirements have created a 'problem' for the non-Indians. 
From our perspective, we have what they want, and, just as was done in the 
past, they are looking for ways to take what we have. 
(Peter Capossela, Indian Reserved Water Rights in Missouri River Basin, 6 Great Plains Natural 
Resources J. 131, 144 (2002) quote of Peterson Zah). 
For these reasons, Tribes may justifiably seek to withhold certain information from 
disclosure, in order to protect their rights in the event of future litigation. Ultimately, the proposed 
rule as contemplated may be unworkable. 
In the preamble, EPA instructs that "the agency's approach will be informed by public 
comment and input provided through tribal consultation." (87 Fed. Reg. 74369). Tribal concerns 
with the inconsistent and non-existent consultation by federal agencies is well-documented. 
Indeed, the EPA failed to engage the Tribes in early and meaningful consultation on this proposed 
rule. We are skeptical that Tribal rights will be protected in the review process delineated in the 
proposed rule, by promises of future consultations by EPA. 
EPA Should Initiate Nation-to-Nation Consultation before Issuing a Final Rule 
Executive Order 12898 on Environmental Justice requires protecting the health of 
indigenous populations engaged in subsistence hunting and fishing activities. It is appropriate for 
EPA to require human health criteria in state water quality standards to account for the increased 
P.O. Box 271 
www.tribalwateralliance_org 
Pine Ridge, SD 57770 

Sincerely, 
consumption of game and fish by Tribal members engaged in Treaty-protected subsistence 
activities, and to protect Tribal designated uses under the Clean Water Act. However, the proposed 
rule in its current form may result in unanticipated adverse impacts to Tribes. 
The proposed rule does not delineate a process for the identification, protection and proper 
use of the Tribal information that may be necessary for the adequate protection of the waters 
subject to Tribal reserved rights, including our reserved water rights. 
EPA should initiate 
nation-to-nation consultation with the Tribes before proceeding any further with the proposed rule. 
One option would be to initiate a negotiated rulemaking with the Tribes. 
Thank you for considering the comments of the Great Plains Tribal Water Alliance. I may 
be contacted at  dcrowghostriDstandingrock.org  or (701) 854-8534, for additional information. Pila 
miya (Thank you). 
Errol 'Do 
row Ghost, Chairman 
Board oirectors 
P.O. Box 271 
www.tribalwateralliance,orq 
Pine Ridge, SD 57770

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0272 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
® 
Board of Directors & Officers 
President, Mary Anne Nelson,  
Surface & Wastewater Division 
Administrator, Idaho Department of 
Environmental Quality 
 
Vice President, Amanda Vincent,  
Environmental Scientist Manager, 
Louisiana Department of 
Environmental Quality 
 
Treasurer, Chris Wieberg,  
Water Protection Program Director, 
Missouri Department of Natural 
Resources 
 
Secretary, Karen Mogus, Deputy 
Director, Division of Water Quality, 
California State Water Resources 
Control Board 
 
Past President, Andrew Gavin,  
Deputy Executive Director, 
Susquehanna River Basin Commission 
 
Regional Representatives 
Region I    - Tracy Wood (NH) 
Region II    - Jennifer Feltis (NJ)   
Region III    - Jeff Seltzer (DC) 
Region IV    - Jennifer Dodd (TN) 
Region V    - Adrian Stocks (WI) 
Region VI    - Shelly Lemon (NM) 
Region VII   - Lori McDaniel (IA) 
Region VIII  - Jennifer Zygmunt (WY) 
Region IX    - Karen Mogus (CA)  
Region X    - Randy Bates (AK) 
Interstates - Evelyn Powers (IEC)  
 
Executive Director & General Counsel  
Julia Anastasio 
 
1634 I Street, NW, Ste. # 750,  
Washington, DC  20006 
 
TEL:  202-756-0600 
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
 
 
 
March 6th, 2023 
 
 
Sara Hisel McCoy 
Director, Standards and Health Protection Division 
Office of Water, US Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20460 
 
Via electronic mail and regulations.gov docket 
 
Re: ACWA Comments in response to proposed Water Quality 
Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
 
The Association of Clean Water Administrators (“ACWA”) is the 
independent, nonpartisan, national organization of state, interstate 
and territorial water programs (“states”) that, on a daily basis, 
implement the water quality programs of the Clean Water Act 
(“CWA”), including the development and implementation of Water 
Quality Standards (WQS). Under the tenets of cooperative 
federalism, states, authorized tribes, and EPA are co-regulators who 
jointly implement the CWA. States appreciate the opportunity to 
comment on the proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (“the rule”). ACWA is 
providing higher-level perspectives. Not all states concur with all 
positions and recommendations in this letter; several have stronger 
concerns with a TRR amendment to the WQS Regulation, and ACWA 
urges EPA to closely consider comments of individual states that, 
especially for this proposed rule, may have concerns uniquely 
applicable to them. 
 
Most states agree that the federal government’s obligation to protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights (“TRR”) should be explicit. All states are 
committed to establishing water quality criteria and WQS which 
protect the general and vulnerable populations living within their 
jurisdictions, including tribes. For this reason, states are 
fundamentally supportive of the intent and spirit of this rule.  
 
Unfortunately, EPA did not work with EPA programs, states, and 
right-holders (“the parties”) to craft an implementable framework 
that could achieve the desired outcome. After careful review, too 
many states have significant concerns with the rule’s implementation 
framework and unanswered questions for ACWA to support it. 
Despite their support for the parties working together to protect TRR, 
some states recommend EPA does not finalize the TRR Rule.  

    
 
 
ACWA is not taking a position on whether EPA should withdraw the proposed rule, but 
urges EPA to work with the parties to craft implementable approaches that ensure EPA’s 
obligations to tribes under federal law, ensure right holders’ due protections under state 
and federal actions on WQS, and ensure states and authorized tribes can feasibly 
implement WQS programs given the timeline and resource constraints they face under 
applicable laws, regulations, and budget limitations. ACWA believes states should be 
expected to incorporate water quality protections for TRR only after EPA identifies 
relevant TRR and then appropriate water quality protections have been identified, 
negotiated, and agreed upon by states and right holders with assistance as needed from 
EPA and other federal agencies1. 
Whether EPA pursues implementation approaches in or outside the WQS Regulation, 
ACWA stands ready to support the parties in creating workable, effective paths forward. 
ACWA’s concerns about the rule does not preclude states’ support of the protection of 
tribal members and right holders to at least the same risk level as provided to the general 
population of a state, as outlined in proposed § 131.9(a)(2). All state water quality 
programs work to meet the mission of protecting the health of any people dependent on 
the aquatic resources within or downstream of their jurisdiction.  
States have and will continue to work with tribes, right holders, and EPA to ensure current 
and new WQS do not interfere with TRR and ensure water quality is attained or 
maintained sufficient to support tribally-significant waters and water-dependent 
resources consistent with treaties and EPA’s federal trust responsibilities. Regardless of 
ACWA’s feedback in this letter or the outcome of EPA’s rulemaking effort, states are 
keenly interested in working with tribes of any status, EPA, and relevant federal agencies 
charged with protecting TRR and overseeing the federal trust responsibility to tribes, to 
establish effective and efficient CWA processes that result in unsuppressed TRR. 
 
1. Summarized Recommendations for an Implementable 
TRR/WQS Framework 
See Section 3, “ACWA’s Concerns with the Rule” for further discussion. Please note that 
not all states concur with each recommendation and their independent comments 
should be carefully considered. 
A. Use this rule to recognize EPA’s obligation to protect TRR in WQS only. If 
EPA determines it must amend the WQS Regulation to protect TRR despite historically 
contending otherwise, in this approach the Regulation would only be revised to 
recognize that EPA must ensure TRR. EPA’s recognition would drive the parties to 
promptly convene to determine and interpret TRR, consider implementation guidance 
 
1Among some states there is a great concern that in the proposed rule, (1) EPA has not identified where and to what extent tribal 
reserved rights apply. The preamble indicates all treaties apply, but in practice they cannot because some federal instruments 
including treaties, statutes, executive orders and others have been superseded by court rulings. (2) The proposed rule implies that 
for the states to develop, modify, or review their WQS and specifically address TRR, tribes will inform EPA and the state what 
their reserved rights are and where they apply. There is no recourse for the state if there is disagreement. 

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
3 
and establish long-term plans, collect necessary data, and make appropriate WQS 
revisions and submission consultations /approvals. This approach reflects the reality 
that regardless of the outcome of this rulemaking, the parties agree that they need to 
convene to address TRR and relevant WQS processes because neither EPA, nor tribes, 
nor states alone can ensure TRR. If this approach is not taken, see applicable 
recommendations B-D below. 
B. Include an EPA-only duty to conduct the initial inquiry2 and provide states 
with TRR information pursuant to existing federal law and guidance. 
Consistent with federal guidance and current practice, EPA needs to assemble TRR 
data into a national database. States should not be compelled to complete unfunded 
mandates, and EPA should be enabled to act in its role as primary contact with tribes 
on CWA matters reflecting EPA’s Nation-to-Nation relationship with tribes and the US 
Government’s trust responsibility. 
C. Phase in implementation. A phase-in timeline in the WQS regulation and/or future 
guidance on TRR/WQS is essential to enable the parties to determine and negotiate 
TRR protections, followed by state actions on WQS, without added costs or delays from 
litigation.  
D. Explicitly include EPA-tribe consultation upon draft WQS publication for 
comment. Explicitly identify the comment period for a state’s draft WQS as the legal 
trigger to begin tribal consultation to verify TRR protections. (States prefer 
consultation begin earlier than this stage if possible.) This is essential to preventing a 
larger WQS backlog, states from submitting inadequate WQS, and/or EPA having to 
promulgate WQS on states’ behalf.  
 
2. General Concurrence with the Rule 
A. Processes to ensure TRR should incorporate and result in clarity, transparency, and 
predictability. 
B. Tribes are among those populations that are exceptionally vulnerable to surface water 
pollution and/or water quality degradation. Proposed §131.9(a)(2) clarifies that right 
holders are the target population for deriving human health criteria (“HHC”) (i.e., 
should be protected to the same risk level as a state’s general population rather than 
being considered a highly-exposed population when deriving a cancer risk level) while 
states should be able to decide if a new designated use is appropriate to protect TRR or 
if the protection can be applied to existing uses. Additionally, protecting TRR through 
WQS is a critical component of reducing the impact of increasing stressors to water 
resources, aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources and health risks faced by right 
holders. 
C. EPA has identified appropriate minimum critical information necessary to evaluate 
whether WQS need to be revised to ensure TRR, but more exploration is warranted 
with the parties. The preamble identifies minimum critical information as:  
(1) the nature of the right (i.e., a fishing, hunting, resource gathering, etc.); 
 
2 In the preamble, “the initial inquiry” describes the process for determining whether TRR exist and apply, and how those reserved 
rights could be protected through implementation of the requirements of the proposed rule.  

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
4 
(2) where the right applies (i.e., to a specific set of waterbodies or to waters generally 
within a broad geographic area); and, 
(3) how the right is exercised (e.g., subsistence or ceremonial purposes). 
 
3. ACWA’s Concerns with the Rule 
Please note that some states have unique circumstances and concerns relative to the 
TRR Rule. EPA should carefully review their independent comments. 
A. EPA failed to meaningfully consult state co-regulators on a rule approach 
or the draft rule. The WQS Regulation is modified infrequently, for good reason, and 
has direct implications to EPA’s CWA co-regulators. As a general matter, states expect 
substantive co-regulator discussion on the nature of a proposed modification before 
EPA proposes a WQS Rule revision. 
 
EPA claims in the preamble that Pursuant to EO 13132L the Agency conducted pre-
proposal discussions with states. There, it heard that states “requested additional 
clarification about EPA’s expectations,” and “took these discussions into account 
during the drafting of this rule.” It is not clear how EPA took these discussions into 
account.  
 
EPA approached states via an ACWA listening session in September, 2021, and ACWA 
requested EPA participate in a session of ACWA’s Annual Meeting in August, 2022 
(which also included discussion of the pending “Tribal Baseline WQS Rule”). In the 
listening session, EPA provided a presentation of its intentions 3  in developing a 
proposed rule. EPA did not ask states to participate in discussion among the parties to 
consider implementable approaches, nor did EPA ask states for ideas on an 
implementable approach(es), given states’ primary role in developing WQS. States also 
asked key questions – see the non-exhaustive list below – that should have been 
addressed prior to proposing revisions to the WQS Regulation. These went largely 
unaddressed in the rule. EPA did not reply to ACWA otherwise.  
• Has EPA reviewed all treaties for reserved rights, and if so, how can a state 
obtain EPA's opinion on those reserved rights related to treaties affecting our 
state? 
• If you incorporate a broad framework without a map or detail of where reserved 
rights exist, how will a state know where EPA considers where TRR apply? 
• How should [state clean water programs] approach a situation where a state 
[government] and tribe disagree about TRR? 
• How does a state identify the aquatic resources to which a reserved right applies 
(and for which tribes)? Is it anticipated that this information would become 
known in public engagement processes for WQS? 
 
3 “Questions Asked During September 2021 ACWA MSA-EPA Meeting” available at 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0023  

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
5 
• Even though they do not have a full inventory of TRR, can EPA describe generally 
the scope of TRR to the best of their understanding? Are they, for example, very 
common, likely to occur in most states, or very uncommon, etc.? 
• Does EPA plan to provide states with additional resources to conduct [TRR] 
evaluations [during Triennial Reviews and WQS revisions/development]? 
• So if states and tribes agree on areas of rights then EPA would [concur], right? 
 
B. EPA should work with states and tribes to evaluate implementable 
approaches. According to the preamble, during development of the rule, EPA held a 
90-day consultation with federally recognized tribes, in addition to two national tribal 
listening sessions and 20 EPA/tribal staff and leadership meetings. States are aware of 
only two EPA engagements with states, via ACWA. Almost all states reported to ACWA 
that EPA did not reach out to them otherwise. ACWA does not request parity with 
tribes/right holders regarding EPA’s level of engagement on the rule; rather, EPA 
should have increased engagements and extended the engagement period with both 
tribes and CWA co-regulators. ACWA requests EPA convene the parties to consider an 
implementable approach while the rule is still draft. Just as the rule requires TRR be 
determined and protected through a process of mutual consideration and discussion 
between the parties, ACWA believes arriving at an implementable framework will 
require mutual consideration and discussion.  
 
C. The rule aims for “uniformity and consistency,” but the rule preamble and 
framework are inconsistent. The rule states an objective of creating a “uniform 
approach for establishment of WQS where tribal reserved rights apply and clearly 
laying out how EPA will review such WQS.”4 In the same preamble, EPA notes that “the 
effect of these proposed revisions on the establishment or revision of a state’s WQS will 
be case-specific.” 5 Additionally, all states will experience impact. Some states with 
tribes may need to revise WQS. States without tribes may need to revise WQS if 
exercisable TRR are discovered to apply, even if right holders reside entirely outside 
the state. All states will need to conduct an initial inquiry to satisfy the WQS submittal 
requirements. Thus, all states and territories will experience impact. Case-specific 
circumstances could exacerbate this impact. 
i. EPA is not consistent or transparent about EPA’s awareness of TRR. The rule would 
require states to make efforts to identify applicable TRR, in part because no national 
inventory of TRR exists and because EPA has stated that it does not have an 
inventory of TRR. However, EPA’s Information Collection Request to collect data 
pursuant to this rule states, “EPA does not anticipate this rule will impose any 
compliance costs on the District of Columbia or any U.S. territories because EPA is 
not aware of any federally recognized tribes with reserved rights in or downstream 
of these jurisdictions.”6 This suggests EPA has at least partially inventoried TRR. 
 
4 Preamble Section IV(A), pg. 74366, available at  https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/12/05/2022-26240/water-
quality-standards-regulatory-revisions-to-protect-tribal-reserved-rights  
5 Preamble Section IV(A), pg. 74367, available at  https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/12/05/2022-26240/water-
quality-standards-regulatory-revisions-to-protect-tribal-reserved-rights 
6 Information Collection Request for Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (Proposed 
Rule) - Supporting Statement. Pg. 6. Available at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0145  

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
6 
EPA has not responded to ACWA’s questions about the extent of TRR information 
EPA has gathered to date. 
ii. The preamble claims Proposed 40 CFR 131.6(g)(1) would require WQS submissions 
include information about TRR, as informed by rights holders, where applicable. 
This is inconsistent with the rule language. Proposed 40 CFR 131.6(g)(1) ensures 
right holders have an opportunity to engage. States are concerned that some right 
holders will not (since EPA, not states, is a tribe’s sovereign peer) or, critically, 
cannot (due to resource constraints) engage with states during key WQS processes 
or timeframes. In those circumstances, states will be unable to fulfill the proposed 
40 CFR 131.6(g)(1) responsibility if interpreted as “informed by right holders” rather 
than “made opportunities for right holders to inform.” States cannot guarantee 
tribes will inform state efforts to protect TRR and therefore cannot be held 
responsible for meeting the requirements. ACWA recognizes that EPA cannot, 
either, but submits that EPA has a greater chance of success given its position and 
role among the parties. 
iii. The rule adds to inconsistent EPA and federal direction on appropriate state 
consultation with tribes. Outside the rule, EPA has instructed different state 
agencies and environmental media programs to coordinate with tribes differently. 
In some cases, states are expected to defer to EPA on engagement and consultation 
entirely without interference. This is one reason some CWA co-regulators do not 
have the relationships with tribes that they desire or need to expediently implement 
the rule. We request EPA internally coordinate across EPA program offices towards 
a single, holistic recommended approach for states to engage tribes across programs, 
especially given the federal trust and TRR responsibilities EPA seeks to achieve with 
the rule.  
iv. The rule does not address state-recognized tribes or agreements. ACWA requests 
EPA clarify the obligations of states and EPA in determining approaches to protect 
TRR of state-recognized tribes and agreements, and/or provide written guidance on 
the topic.  
v. The rule is inconsistent on “unsuppressed” exercise of rights. Proposed § 131.9(a)(1) 
requires that WQS protect the exercise of TRR unsuppressed by water quality or 
availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource. The rule states also that 
defining the unsuppressed exercise of a right should account for planned waterbody 
restoration projects that would result in increased opportunities to use the water 
resource in the future. In that scenario, “EPA is proposing to require that WQS must 
be set at levels that reflect unsuppressed exercise of the reserved right.” EPA should 
clarify the implication here that if no restoration projects are planned/underway, 
WQS do not need to reflect unsuppressed exercise of the right – which contradicts 
Proposed § 131.9(a)(1). 
 
D. The rule includes unfunded and redundant mandates. EPA states in the 
preamble, “This action does not contain any unfunded mandate as described in UMRA, 
2 U.S.C. 1531–1538.” 7  While the rule likely would not qualify as an “unfunded 
mandate” based on annual financial burden thresholds, the rule imposes new 
 
7 Preamble pg. 74375, available at https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2022-26240/p-254  

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
7 
requirements upon states to ensure the federal government remains in compliance 
with federal law without supplying additional funds or resources. Additionally, 
proposed 40 CFR 131.20(a) “would require states to evaluate whether there are 
applicable tribal reserved rights relevant to waters subject to the state’s WQS during 
the public triennial review process.” To do so, EPA expects states to “explicitly request 
information regarding the nature and scope of [TRR] in each triennial review.” It is not 
mentioned why this is necessary after a TRR is determined to not exist/apply, and 
redundantly burdens states. If TRR changes through new federal treaties or law, a 
federal representative should inform the parties immediately. States should not need 
to repeatedly request updates from EPA and tribes. 
 
E. The Rule identifies essential actions to ensure TRR in WQS but passes EPA 
obligations and roles to states that are not feasible to implement. States 
agree with the EPA Administrator that explicitly recognizing TRR in WQS will ensure 
tribal aquatic resources are abundant and safe to consume. However, states disagree 
that adding state responsibilities to this recognition will reaffirm the Nation-to-Nation 
partnership.8 The rule shifts the burden of implementing existing EPA authorities and 
responsibilities to states, likely to the detriment of tribe-state and state-EPA 
relationships. States that maintain very strong relationships with local tribes share this 
concern.  
i. EPA should recognize that WQS must protect TRR, but also recognize that federal 
guidance requires EPA to determine the location and nature of those rights. EPA 
notes in the rule’s press release that Bureau of Indian Affairs in late 2022 published 
TRR Best Practices documents for adherence by Federal agencies. The Best Practices 
Flowchart9 clearly states, “[federal] field staff should have a list of relevant treaties in 
their service areas and be familiar with them in advance of any agency actions or 
decisions. Develop a list of relevant treaties and associated rights through 
consultation with local tribes.” To apply this guidance to the rule, it would be most 
appropriate for EPA Regions to inventory treaties and TRR through tribal 
consultation, not states. 
 
This guidance and precedence all indicates the same duty: collating and determining 
TRR are responsibilities are of the United States, not individual states, and lie within 
the bounds of the Nation-to-Nation partnership and the federal trust responsibility. 
As the 2022 interagency memorandum Best Practices For Identifying And 
Protecting Tribal Treaty Rights, Reserved Rights, And Other Similar Rights In 
Federal Regulatory Actions And Federal Decision-Making10 notes, “In total, the U.S. 
ratified approximately 374 treaties with Native nations.” If EPA/states are to live up 
to honoring TRR in the CWA context, EPA should not consider shifting those 
significant federal responsibilities to states that by definition lack the consultation 
 
8 “EPA News Release: EPA Announces Proposal to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights in Water Quality Standards and Best 
Practices for Tribal Treaty and Reserved Rights.” 11/30/2022. Available at https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-announces-
proposal-protect-tribal-reserved-rights-water-quality-standards-and-best  
9 Available at https://www.bia.gov/sites/default/files/dup/inline-files/ttr_flowchart.pdf   
10 Pg. 6. Available at: Best Practices For Identifying And Protecting Tribal Treaty Rights, Reserved Rights, And Other Similar 
Rights In Federal Regulatory Actions And Federal Decision-Making 

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
8 
role established under federal law. As noted in the Summary Report of Tribal 
Consultation for the Proposed Rule, some tribal commenters raised “the need for 
meaningful consultation with affected tribal reserved right holders on the scope and 
definition of their reserved rights,” and that “EPA cannot delegate its trust 
responsibility to consult with tribes and protect tribal reserved rights to states, noting 
that tribes’ government-to-government relationship is with the federal government 
rather than states.”11 
 
States support establishing co-regulator understanding of water quality necessary to 
fully protect TRR, not reinforcing existing suppressed uses, and elevating Indigenous 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge (ITEK) 12  in decision-making. EPA and other 
federal agencies with directives and/or deep experience consulting with tribes need 
to work with tribes to gather WQS-related input and ITEK, as well as information 
about existing TRR, before states conduct Triennial Reviews or finalize WQS. This is 
not to suggest that states are unwilling to engage tribes on these matters – states will 
collaborate with the parties regardless of the outcome of this rulemaking – but 
instead recognizes the Nation-to-Nation relationship, as well as current federal 
guidance and historical precedent: federal agencies have been, and are, expected to 
lead such engagement, multi-party facilitation, and information management. 
Accordingly, EPA should focus on identifying and clarifying the nature and scope of 
all TRR, and their waterbody applicability, and inventorying these data into a 
national clearinghouse/database.  
ii. The rule is redundant of existing federal authorities providing that federal agencies 
inventory and not interfere with TRR. During past efforts to revise the WQS 
Regulation (including 1983 and 2015), EPA chose to not include language explicitly 
stating that WQS not interfere with TRR because EPA had existing authority to do so. 
The rule preamble discusses EPA’s recent WQS experiences concerning Washington 
and Maine, and EPA also discussed experiences concerning Oregon in discussion 
with ACWA. These experiences reflect EPA’s existing authorities. ACWA requests 
EPA clarify if EPA’s interpretation of its own authorities and duty to protect TRR in 
WQS has changed since 1983 and/or 2015. Further, in the rule EPA states: “With 
respect to carcinogens, the 2000 Methodology states that 10-5 and 10-6 risk levels 
may be acceptable for the general population and that highly exposed populations 
should not exceed a 10-4 risk level.” EPA also notes, “Future iterations of this 
methodology may make different recommendations regarding cancer risk level.” EPA 
has elsewhere committed to, in the next few years, updating the 2000 methodology 
to protect higher fish consumers at the same level as the general population. If true, 
the need for proposed §131.9(a)(2) appears unnecessary given existing §131.11(b)(1). 
This is another indicator that EPA already has authorities necessary to protect TRR. 
 
11 “Summary Report of Tribal Consultation for the Proposed Rule: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights.” Pg. 8. Available at https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-11/summary-report-tribal-
consultation-proposed-rule-wqs.pdf  
12 Memorandum for the Heads of Departments and Agencies: Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Federal 
Decision Making. November 2021. Available at: https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/111521-OSTP-CEQ-
ITEK-Memo.pdf  

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
9 
iii. The rule framework conflates states’ local expertise with existing obligations and 
responsibilities. EPA has communicated that states and EPA are bound by federal 
laws, and this proposed framework compels the parties to work together on 
determining and ensuring TRR; specifically, states gain obligations under the rule 
owing to their local expertise. While states have local expertise, they do not 
necessarily have expertise on federally-established TRR, especially in instances 
where right holders reside entirely outside the state. EPA has also communicated that 
states have stronger relationships with their tribes. While many states have strong 
relationships with tribes, the preamble of this rule notes, “The foundation of this 
coordination in this WQS context necessarily includes the state, with CWA authority 
to set standards in the reserved rights areas in question[;] local governments, who 
often have even more direct contact with tribal members and their 
governments[;]…”13 In many cases, local governments and EPA have stronger ties to 
right holders than state clean water programs. In states with strong ties to right 
holders, those relationships may be in multiple agencies, or primarily in state 
agencies that do not address water quality.  
iv. The rule is an opportunity to positively affect engagement among the parties. During 
tribal consultation on the rule, some commenters noted frustration with how states 
have handled tribes’ input during Triennial Reviews. States view renewed focus on 
TRR as an opportunity to reestablish tribes’ input on clean water decisions and state-
tribal relationships where strained. Federal agencies with primacy and experience in 
consultation can support this. This is one reason states recommend EPA consult the 
parties earlier in WQS processes than the rule outlines: significant discussion may be 
needed to implement TRR protections. It is possible that concurrence will be needed 
between states and right holders with a history of impasse on water quality policy.  
v. EPA notes the need for mutual consideration among the parties but does not 
accommodate it in the rule. Under the rule, “determinations regarding protection of 
TRR should be made through a process of mutual consideration and discussion 
between right holders, states, and the Federal government.” However, the rule 
requires states to consult tribes to complete the initial inquiry after receiving 
Triennial Review “kick off letters” from EPA that may contain TRR information (i.e., 
the start of the rule process); and EPA’s consultation with tribes, which is essential in 
completing the initial inquiry, would not begin until WQS are submitted (i.e., the 
conclusion of the rule process). Under the rule timeline, there is no point where the 
parties mutually consider and consult on protecting TRR. 
vi. States want to protect TRR and will implement WQS that protect TRR once identified 
and clarified. To protect TRR, states are requesting EPA collect and share all initial 
inquiry information with states and tribes, and update states and tribes accordingly 
if EPA’s awareness changes. EPA should not require states to duplicate EPA’s effort 
in collecting information about the scope, nature, and current and past use of the 
TRR through initial inquiries every Triennial Review cycle. Further, EPA leading 
consultation among the parties will be essential in achieving the desired outcome and 
reaching concurrence on difficult open questions. For example, a longstanding canon 
of the Supreme Court is that doubtful or ambiguous expressions in a treaty should be 
 
13 87 FR 74378, available at https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2022-26240/page-74378  

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
10 
resolved in favor of tribes. Where treaties with such language exist, it is appropriate 
that EPA lead consultation with the parties to determine treaty clarifications in tribes’ 
favor, for states to then incorporate in WQS.  EPA should not require states to (1) 
consult tribes and request tribes clarify ambiguous federal treaties – which is above 
and beyond existing state/tribe coordination in existing WQS public participation 
processes – and (2) separately request EPA verify that the state is accurately applying 
the language in favor of the tribe. It is the federal government’s duty to consult tribes 
on federal policy.  
 
F. Operationalizing the rule’s intentions should be done in phases using 
plans developed by the parties, to allow open questions to be clarified and 
avoid unnecessary costs. If finalized, ACWA recommends that proposed 
§ 131.20(a) specify Triennial Reviews beginning in a future year. As one tribal 
commenter requested, “EPA should require states to develop long-term plans in 
collaboration or in close consultation with affected Native Nations to bring affected 
water bodies into (or closer to) compliance.”14 EPA can achieve the rule’s objective to 
protect TRR in WQS (as federal law has provided since prior to the establishment of 
CWA) by helping the parties establish long-term plans to address TRR in WQS. EPA 
noted in the preamble and a listening session with ACWA that, to paraphrase, 
implementation of the rule will be site-specific and the parties will need to work 
together to discover the best approach(es) to implementation. States believe a planned 
implementation approach will accomplish this and the rule’s objectives, but with fewer 
legal costs/delays and improved data and WQS. Implementation plans would likely 
outline components in the rule: identifying what TRR exist, translating them into WQS, 
determining which WQS need to be established/modified, and a feasible timeline for 
completion given available data and the parties’ resource constraints.  
 
Without phased implementation, states are concerned that legal action will be taken if 
the parties’ actions do not “satisfy” the rule upon the first applicable Triennial or WQS 
submission review. Legal action would cause further delays and divert state WQS and 
legal staff attention from implementing the rule. The parties should not face legal 
exposure upon rule finalization when the rule preamble and EPA communication with 
ACWA acknowledges that it will take time for the parties to cooperate and 
operationalize the intentions of the rule – intentions that, to reiterate, states support.  
 
Additionally, the preamble notes the term “unsuppressed level” which does not mean 
heritage uses but instead a balance of past, present, and future uses. To operationalize 
the term, the parties will need to convene and reach concurrence (and EPA likely will 
need to publish implementation guidance). It is important that each tribe, state, and 
EPA Region, or potential litigation from other stakeholders, does not establish an array 
of unique interpretations (particularly if EPA does not operationally define the term or 
tie it to overarching federal guidance in the rule). These are examples of why the rule 
 
14 “Summary Report of Tribal Consultation for the Proposed Rule: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights.” Pg. 10. Available at https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-11/summary-report-tribal-
consultation-proposed-rule-wqs.pdf  
 

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
11 
would benefit from including a phased implementation; other examples are provided 
below. EPA cannot expect the concept of this rule to be successful if states and tribes 
must comply immediately upon finalization. 
i. Timing of relevant actions needs greater consideration. EPA expects states may need 
to revise WQS to address Human Health Criteria (“HHC”), Aquatic Life Criteria, and 
then any other changes. If finalized, the rule would require some states to modify 
their HHC immediately. Meanwhile, EPA has not finished updating exposure factors 
in a number of current 304(a) HHC, nor issued 304(a) HHC for any PFAS. States will 
need EPA support on exposure factors protective of TRR, and PFAS are a major 
concern of states’ with respect to some tribes’ consumption of fish and/or TRR to 
gather and consume fish. If those HHC are deemed necessary to protect TRR, states 
would be in a position of needing to adopt HHC that neither states nor EPA have 
finished developing to comply with the rule.  In effect, the expediency required by the 
rule would require states to duplicate regulatory effort and/or take steps prematurely. 
ii. Definitions. It is unclear how EPA plans to contextually define "aquatic resources and 
aquatic-dependent resources.” For example, if hunting is a reserved right, does this 
include ungulates drinking from lakes/streams? How would EPA respond in this 
example to states that have existing criteria to protect ungulates vs. states that do 
not? Here, other state agencies managing natural resources need to be engaged on 
WQS. This is one reason the rule underestimates states’ implementation burden. 
 
 
States also seek clarity on many aspects of the rule that tribes raised during 
consultation in the pre-proposal period, including how to determine water quality 
levels which protect TRR; recourse when the parties disagree and/or if one right 
holder interferes with the rights of another (would 40 CFR § 131.7 be triggered?); 
managing multiple TRR and uses (i.e., varying fish consumption rates) within one 
geographic area; and, if consistent WQS can be establishes across TRR and complex 
jurisdictional boundaries in a geographic area. 15   States also share tribes’ 
recommendation that EPA convene the parties to explore these aspects.   
iii. Initial inquiry cost is not estimated. EPA states: “EPA considered the costs associated 
with labor from economists, engineers, scientists, and lawyers for development of 
state regulations.”16 Performing an initial inquiry in order to be aware of TRR prior 
to Triennial Review is unrelated to development of state regulations – in this context, 
modifying WQS according to information gleaned in the initial inquiry. It is related 
to the responsibility EPA is assigning states via this rule. Thus, a significant cost is 
unaccounted for in the rule. States are also concerned that among states and the 
parties, it is not possible to attain the capacity of legal expertise and WQS employee 
bandwidth to implement this rule immediately. Legal expertise specializing in Indian 
law and TRR, given the absence of a searchable national database of all sources of law 
reflecting TRR, will need to be onboarded or developed among states, tribes, and EPA 
Regions – and given the resource constraints of many states and tribes, this would 
jeopardize other WQS actions and priorities. Personnel equipped to facilitate 
 
15 “Summary Report of Tribal Consultation for the Proposed Rule: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights.” Pg. 8, 9. Available at https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-11/summary-report-tribal-
consultation-proposed-rule-wqs.pdf  
16 https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2022-26240/p-229  

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
12 
dialogue among the parties will also need to be onboarded or developed. Reaching 
such capacity will take new resources and time. 
iv. EPA uses a one-time cost estimate. It does not incorporate the requirement that 
states consider TRR in every Triennial Review. EPA also does not specify if an initial 
inquiry needs to be performed for each WQS action regardless of the Triennial Review 
cycle. 
v. EPA does not estimate costs and public health/environmental externalities related to 
addressing point and nonpoint sources of pollution pursuant to TRR. Per the 
preamble, “EPA acknowledges that achievement of any benefits associated with 
cleaner water would involve additional control measures, and thus costs to regulated 
entities and nonpoint sources, that have not been included in the economic analysis 
for this proposed rulemaking.” During consultation on the rule, some tribes noted 
that “nutrient pollution is a key obstacle to exercising their reserved rights”. EPA has 
recently published 304(a) recommended nutrient criteria for lakes and reservoirs17, 
but acknowledges that it, “focuses on the implementation of nutrient criteria under 
the authority of CWA. States and authorized tribes may have additional authority to 
manage nonpoint sources, which are a major contributor of nutrient pollution.”18 
This rightly recognizes that authority to manage nutrients and nonpoint sources 
under CWA is limited, and some states and authorized tribes do not have additional 
authority to manage nonpoint sources of nutrients. Regardless of WQS, it is possible 
that complete elimination of nutrient contributions via regulated point sources fails 
to protect certain right holders, given the extent of nonpoint source contributions 
generally. In this scenario, many states will be unable to address nonpoint source 
contributions through regulation; achieving TRR protection will not be a question of 
nutrients WQS, but instead will require that the federal government – through its 
legal duty to protect TRR –increase nonpoint source control investments to address 
nutrient impairments.  
 
Furthermore, the rule does not estimate treatment costs for point sources of 
pollutants, including nutrients. EPA has recently assessed that increased treatment 
of point source nutrient concentrations varies directly with health and environmental 
tradeoffs that are relevant to TRR. Requiring point sources to conduct the highest 
achievable nutrient reductions also results in the greatest potential for health 
externalities19  that affect not only right holders, but general populations in a state. 
vi. The rule language suggests EPA gives itself authority to establish uses beyond 
101(a)(2) uses and related WQS in certain situations. EPA asks, “Should EPA include 
in 40 CFR 131.9 specifics on whether or how a state can revise designated uses and 
still protect tribal reserved rights?” ACWA urges EPA to discuss this with states 
further before opining in final regulation. Treaties and the CWA provide EPA 
authority to ensure WQS do not interfere with TRR regardless of the designated uses. 
States disagree that there are situations during the Use Attainability Analysis process 
 
17 Ambient Water Quality Criteria to Address Nutrient Pollution in Lakes and Reservoirs, EPA-822-R-21-005, 2021. 
18 Frequently Asked Questions: Implementing the2021Recommended Clean Water Act Section 304(a) Ambient Water Quality 
Criteria to Address Nutrient Pollution in Lakes and Reservoirs. EPA-820-P-23-001, 2023. Pg. 9 
19 Life Cycle and Cost Assessments of Nutrient Removal Technologies in WWTPs, EPA-832-R-21-006. Externalities include 
eutrophication, cumulative energy demand, global warming, acidification, fossil depletion, smog and particulate matter, ozone 
depletion, water depletion, cancer and non-cancer human health risks, and aquatic ecotoxicity. 

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
13 
where it is essential that designated uses be maintained and strived for to protect 
TRR; the only essential is that EPA and tribes help states develop, and EPA approve, 
WQS that protect TRR regardless of the designated use.  
 
More pressingly, states are concerned about the potential for federally-required 
designated uses that are not state-established. In some situations, a TRR exists but 
right holders do not exercise the right and may (1) inform EPA that they do not intend 
to resume exercising the right, or (2) not respond to EPA or state inquiries or 
invitations to consult. If EPA determines the TRR still must be protected, EPA must 
resolve in favor of right holders. This could result in EPA disapproving Triennial 
Reviews/WQS submissions until they contain EPA’s interpretation of TRR-protective 
uses and WQS. In effect, the rule would create situations where EPA establishes 
designated uses on behalf of states and tribes, without input from states and tribes. 
The CWA provides states and authorized tribes WQS primacy. 
vii. The rule’s impacts to CWA Section 304(a) Criteria obligations are unclear. The CWA 
requires states to consider adopting CWA 304(a) recommended criteria but permits 
states to alternatively adopt alternative or site-specific scientifically-defensible 
criteria. Where waters subject to TRR involve parameters addressed under 304(a) 
but not yet addressed by a state in WQS, will EPA require the state to immediately 
adopt the 304(a) criteria, or allow the state to develop a state-specific criteria that 
would, when derived, protect the TRR? If EPA publishes 304(a) criteria for 
parameters that no states currently address in WQS, and those parameters are 
considered required to protect some or all TRR, would applicable states need to 
immediately adopt the 304(a) criteria? Would states be permitted time to develop 
their own criteria? 
viii. Water quantity obligation conflicts not considered. Generally, CWA actions are not 
to take primacy over water quantity management decisions by state or federal 
agencies, and most CWA co-regulators do not have authority over water quantity. 
However, states have noted that because (1) treaties are the supreme law of the 
United States and (2) ensuring some treaty-based TRR may require increased 
streamflows, EPA has not fully considered and clarified which would have primacy: 
water resources management decisions or treaties, or CWA obligations to protect 
TRR. Several tribes shared this concern during consultation: “…tribes with water 
rights requested clarification about how this rule would impact adjudicated water 
rights and/or urged EPA to ensure this change to the WQS regulations would protect 
flow sufficient to effectuate tribal reserved rights to aquatic and aquatic-dependent 
resources.” 20 Proposed § 131.9(a)(1) explicitly states that WQS must protect the 
exercise of TRR unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or 
aquatic-dependent resource. Availability may vary directly with water quantity or 
altered duration and frequency of quantity relative to current or seasonal conditions. 
Proposed § 131.9(a)(1) likely creates obligation conflicts with federal or state 
requirements (treaties, contracts, laws, and other instruments) which dictate water 
 
20 “Summary Report of Tribal Consultation for the Proposed Rule: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights.” Pg. 9. Available at https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-11/summary-report-tribal-
consultation-proposed-rule-wqs.pdf 

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
14 
quantity management of streams, river systems, natural lakes, and dammed 
reservoirs.  
 
It is also possible that obligation conflicts exist within the same treaty or set of treaties 
applicable to a set of right holders – for example, treaty obligations to divert water to 
tribal lands or water right holder at volumes which might suppress the availability of 
an aquatic resource for that tribe or other TRR holders within the watershed. 
Regardless of obligation conflicts, multiple state and federal agencies beyond state 
clean water programs and EPA need to be consulted on the rule and discuss 
protecting TRR in situations with complex legal water rights/protections related to 
both quality and quantity. Full discussion on water quality and quantity needs to 
protect TRR needs to occur before the rule could be implemented. 
ix. Cumulative impacts unclear. The summary of tribal engagement feedback notes 
tribes’ interest in understanding and protecting against cumulative impacts of 
point/nonpoint source pollution to migratory species that move through territorial 
waters of different states and countries. States are interested in new or improved 
approaches to address cumulative impacts and would like to raise this in discussion 
with the parties. States also request EPA clarify what approaches it is using or 
considering for species that move through other countries before moving through 
waterbodies and/or terrain in the United States. 
 
G. ACWA recommends an alternative implementation approach to avoid a 
WQS backlog. States are highly concerned about their ability to develop or revise 
WQS in a timely manner under the rule. To successfully revise WQS, TRR need to be 
fully identified and negotiated prior to revisions. If the process for consulting between 
the parties to determine appropriate water quality to protect TRR ultimately resembles 
the 40 CFR § 131.7 dispute resolution mechanism21, states are concerned that the 
parties will not have sufficient lead time to properly revise or approve WQS under 
existing timeframe obligations.  
 
In situations where TRR protections have not been fully negotiated or adjudicated, 
states need to be able to proceed with WQS management using the best information 
they have. Under the rule, it is unclear how long a state should provide a right holder 
to engage in consultation before proceeding with WQS revisions. States are concerned 
that they may need to eventually proceed without tribal input and submit WQS to EPA. 
Should the right holders engage with EPA at that stage, the state’s only recourse to 
correct the WQS is for EPA to disapprove it and provide states 90 days to resubmit. 
Should a state fail to meet this tight timeline, EPA would be obligated to promulgate 
WQS for the state. ACWA recommends EPA perform the work supporting the 
identification and negotiation of TRR/water quality protections as early in the WQS 
process as possible, so that states and tribes can be confident that submitted WQS 
ensure TRR. 
 
 
21 Applicable to disputes between states and tribes as a result of differing water quality standards on common bodies of water. 
See https://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/40/131.7.  

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
15 
Federal guidance22 on tribal consultation, updated in 2022, notes that federal agencies 
should send a letter to tribes with 30 days’ notice, followed by 30 days for tribes to 
provide written comments, followed by EPA preparing a written summary of received 
comments with the Agency’s response, followed by consultation to materially 
determine if the action affects TRR and, if taken, would protect TRR. States are 
concerned that EPA’s 60/90-day review timeline for WQS submissions cannot be met 
if the tribal consultation process begins after WQS are submitted. As EPA knows, it is 
essential that WQS submissions be reviewed promptly to ensure CWA protection of all 
Waters of the United States. 
 
States publish draft WQS for public comment before adopting the WQS and submitting 
to EPA. During draft WQS public comment periods, EPA routinely provides written 
comments to advise whether EPA considers the draft WQS to be potentially 
unprotective of uses or otherwise includes elements that may force EPA to disapprove 
the WQS. As EPA notes elsewhere, “[EPA] Regional offices have the responsibility to 
review [WQS] submissions for consistency with the CWA and regulation, and approve 
or disapprove the WQS. The WQS staff in Regional offices work closely with their states 
on WQS issues, including review of both draft and final submissions of WQS. EPA 
headquarters provides support to the Regional offices in the review of these 
submissions.”23  
 
Because EPA policy allows EPA Regions to comment on draft WQS, ACWA 
recommends EPA interpret its decision on whether to comment on a state’s draft WQS 
as an Agency decision relevant to tribes pursuant to EO 1317524. This would allow EPA 
to consult with tribes during the draft WQS’ comment period to determine if the draft 
WQS would protect TRR, and in turn allow EPA to consult and provide comment to co-
regulators on the draft WQS. This would improve the likelihood that submitted WQS 
protect TRR and may support faster WQS package review. It would also prevent: 
• States from assuming the untenable position of submitting a WQS to EPA without 
indication of whether the WQS protects TRR in the view of right holders and EPA;  
• EPA from conducting tribal consultation only after receiving submitted WQS from 
states, which would likely contribute to the growing WQS backlog; and, 
• EPA from potentially disapproving state-adopted WQS and being forced to 
promulgate WQS on behalf of the state. 
 
H. The preamble overreaches with regard to narrative criteria. EPA states, 
“Where data and information are not currently available to support establishing 
 
22 https://www.bia.gov/sites/default/files/dup/inline-files/ttr_flowchart.pdf  
23 Information Collection Request for Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (Proposed 
Rule) - Supporting Statement. Pg. 9. Available at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0145 
24 “When a federal agency is engaging in regulatory action, undertaking decisions, or commenting on legislation that affect tribes, 
the federal-tribal relationship or on the distribution of power between the federal government and Tribes, the agency shall 
engage, through consultation, with tribes to determine whether tribal treaty, reserved rights, or other similar rights would be 
impacted by the proposed federal action.” (Best Practices For Identifying And Protecting Tribal Treaty Rights, Reserved Rights, 
And Other Similar Rights In Federal Regulatory Actions And Federal Decision-Making, pg. 8) … “[federal agencies shall] have 
an accountable process to ensure meaningful and timely input by Tribal officials in the development of regulatory policies that 
have tribal implications.” (Executive Order 13175, Section 5(a)). 

 
 
 
 
1634 EYE Street, NW, Ste. # 750, Washington, DC  20006 
TEL:  202-756-0600  
 
WWW.ACWA-US.ORG 
16 
numeric levels of water quality, or where data are inconclusive, states may adopt 
narrative WQS to protect the right” [emphasis added]. This language is an overreach. 
The CWA does not give EPA authority to determine when states may or may not 
establish numeric vs narrative criteria, so long as WQS and criteria derivation 
processes are and scientifically defensible. EPA must replace “may” with non-directive 
language, such as “…data are inconclusive, narrative WQS are anticipated to satisfy 
federal requirements to protect the right.” 
 
Thank you for considering ACWA’s comments on the rule. Please be sure to carefully 
consider any comments submitted by individual states. ACWA looks forward to co-
regulator discussion and conversations with the parties to implement the concepts of this 
rule, and as necessary, future iterations of the WQS Regulation. Please contact Julia 
Anastasio, ACWA’s Executive Director and General Counsel (202.756.0600) with any 
questions on the contents of this comment letter. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Mary Anne Nelson 
President, Association of Clean Water Administrators 
Administrator, Surface and Wastewater Division, Idaho Department of Environmental 
Quality 
 
 
 
CC:  
Radhika Fox, Assistant Administrator for Water, EPA  
Deborah Nagle, Director, EPA OW-OST 
Jennifer Brundage, Staff, EPA OW-OST 
Karen Gude, National Tribal Program Coordinator, EPA OW

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0291 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
 
https://www.regulations.gov/ 
Jennifer Brundage  
Office of Water 
Standards and Health Protection Division (4305T)  
Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, Docket ID 
No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791.   
 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments on US EPA’s proposed rule clarifying that 
state and federal water quality standards (“WQS”) must protect water and water-dependent 
resources reserved to tribes through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of federal 
law in waters of the United States, and articulating the existing regulatory framework under the 
Clean Water Act (“CWA”) to achieve these fiduciary obligations (“Proposed Rule”).1  
 
The U.S. Constitution defines treaties as the supreme law of the land, with the same legal force 
as Federal statutes.2 CWA Section 511(a)(3) provides that the Act “shall not be construed as . . . 
affecting or impairing the provisions of any treaty of the United States.”  In implementing CWA 
Section 303(c), EPA has a fiduciary obligation to ensure that its WQS approvals and 
disapprovals are consistent with treaties, statutes, executive orders, and other sources of federal 
law reflecting tribal reserved rights. Water is a sacred resource that must be honored and 
protected given its interconnections with other sacred resources like wild rice and fish.   
 
Tribes have retained a variety of usufructuary rights in the territories they ceded to the U.S. 
Government, including the right to harvest natural resources. Usufructuary rights are vested 
property rights to use, access, or enjoy the fruits of another's property.3 As a signatory to the 
1854 Treaty of LaPointe4 where Grand Portage and other bands ceded more than six million 
acres to the United States (the “1854 Ceded Territory”), Grand Portage retains usufructuary 
 
1 WQS Regulatory Revs. to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed Reg. 74361 et seq. (Dec. 5, 2022), at 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/12/05/2022-26240/water-quality-standards-regulatory-revisions-
to-protect-tribal-reserved-rights. 
2 U.S. Constitution, Art. VI, cl. 2 (“This constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in 
pursuance thereof; and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the authority of the United States, shall be 
the supreme law of the land; and the judges in every state shall be bound thereby, anything in the constitution or 
laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.”) 
3 See usufruct, Black’s Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019). 
4 Treaty with the Chippewa, Sept. 30, 1854, 10 Stat. 1109. 

Page 2 of 4 
Grand Portage Cmts. on EPA Proposed Water Quality Standards to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
GICHI ONIGAMIING- GREAT CARRYING PLACE 
 
 
rights that extend throughout the entire northeast portion of the state of Minnesota. The 1854 
Treaty was not a grant of rights to the Ojibwe, but a grant of rights from the Ojibwe to non-
Indians.5  In the Ceded Territory, Tribes serve as co-managers and stewards of those lands and 
have a legal interest in protecting natural resources.6 All federal agencies, including US EPA, 
share in the federal government’s fiduciary obligation to the Tribes to maintain those treaty 
resources.  
Subsistence, medicinal, cultural and religious practices require harvested natural resources 
including fish, game, and plants like Manoomin/ Psíŋ (wild rice). The health and welfare of tribal 
members who rely upon these resources for sustenance and cultural practices are 
disproportionately put at higher risk because existing regulatory structures have not recognized 
or protected tribal reserved rights.  
 
With the publication of the Proposed Rule, EPA has again confirmed its longstanding and 
binding legal interpretation of the CWA that both US EPA and states must ensure that WQS 
are adequate to protect tribal uses of reserved resources: “In exercising its CWA section 
303(c) authority, EPA has an obligation to ensure that its actions are consistent with treaties, 
statutes, executive orders, and other sources of Federal law reflecting tribal reserved 
rights.”7 Put another way, the underlying obligations here are not new:  
 
Where tribes have reserved rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources, 
protection of such rights falls within the ambit of these broad statutory directives 
and objectives and is consistent with EPA’s longstanding general approach to 
implementing CWA section 303(c), including through adoption and revision of its 
WQS regulation.8 
 
We must note that US EPA has not uniformly followed what it here recognizes is its pre-existing 
obligation under the CWA to acknowledge and protect treaty resources in reviewing and 
approving WQS, however. The Band has a pending lawsuit against US EPA due to the agency’s 
approval of Minnesota’s Class 3 Industrial & Class 4 Agricultural WQS in which the state removed 
numeric WQS protections in favor of less protective narrative standards.9 A primary claim is that, 
over tribal objections, neither the state nor the US EPA adequately evaluated or considered the 
impacts of those changes on wild rice waters--which are both a treaty-protected use and a Class 4 
 
5 See, e.g., Minnesota v. Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians, 526 U.S. 172, 184 (1999) (noting “the 1854 Treaty 
established new hunting and fishing rights in the territory ceded by the Treaty”); Fond du Lac v. Carlson, Civ. No. 
5-92-159 (D.Minn. March 18, 1996) (unpubl. op.) (holding that Fond du Lac retains usufructuary rights in the 1854 
Ceded Territory); Grand Portage Band of Chippewas, et al. v. State of Minnesota, et al., Civ. No. 4-85-1090 
(settling suit to enforce 1854 Treaty as to Grand Portage and Bois Forte Bands against state as reflected in Minn. 
Stat. § 97A.157); United States v. Bresette, 761 F. Supp. 658, 661 (D. Minn. 1991) (citing Lac Courte Oreilles Band 
of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians v. Voigt, 700 F.2d 341, 348 (7th Cir.1983)) (noting “Seventh Circuit has 
interpreted the 1837, 1842, and the 1854 treaties as reserving full usufructuary rights for the Chippewa on the ceded 
territories.”).  
6 Id. 
7 See 87 Fed. Reg. at 74364. 
8 Id. at 74365. 
9 See Compl., Grand Portage Band of Lake Superior Chippewa and Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa 
v. US EPA, et al., Case No. 0:22-cv-01783-JRT-LIB (D.Minn. July 14, 2022). 

Page 3 of 4 
Grand Portage Cmts. on EPA Proposed Water Quality Standards to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
GICHI ONIGAMIING- GREAT CARRYING PLACE 
 
 
designated use under state WQS.  
 
Nevertheless, we applaud EPA’s proposed regulations to clarify that where tribal reserved rights 
exist, states are required to account for those rights by revising designated uses, criteria, and/or 
antidegradation provisions to protect unsuppressed use of reserved resources. Water quality is 
critical to attain the highest and best use standard that is applied to trust resources, whether that is 
for fishing, wild ricing, or ceremonial activities.   
 
It is a huge step towards proper recognition of US EPA’s federal fiduciary obligations that the 
rule will require that WQS protect the health of the tribal members exercising reserved rights by 
recognizing that tribal members have higher (subsistence) consumption rates, and so higher 
health risks than the general public. Subsistence fish consumption in the 1854 Ceded Territory is 
restricted by concentrations of mercury and PFOS that limit the most sensitive people to merely 
one meal per week, one meal per month, or do-not-eat advisories, depending on the fish species 
and size. Many waters have been allowed to become too polluted to sustain brook trout, 
sturgeon, or wild rice growth and reproduction thereby reducing the available treaty-reserved 
resources— while simultaneously limiting the amount of those resources that can be safely 
consumed. In Minnesota, there is a long history of expressed tribal concern documenting the 
damages to wild rice in the 1854 and other Ceded Territories within the state beginning in the 
1860’s.  Tribes have seen the severe diminishment of wild rice across its historic range and have 
called for stronger and broader protections of remaining stands here in Minnesota, one of its last 
refuges in the United States. Manoomin, as the Ojibwe people call it, or Psíŋ, as it is known by 
the Dakota people, is the preeminent cultural resource of this region and central to our cultural 
heritage.  
 
The proposed rule as drafted includes a critical element related to US EPA’s fiduciary obligation 
to ensure that reserved resources are protected, along with the health of the people consuming 
them: requiring documentation of the state’s efforts to obtain information about existing tribal 
reserved rights, as well as the level of water quality that protects those rights in WQS 
submissions.  Determining the unsuppressed level of harvest and consumption requires not just 
federal but state consultation with each Tribe within a given ceded territory before a state can 
evaluate earnestly how to revise WQS to protect tribal reserved rights during triennial reviews.  
If a waterbody cannot currently reasonably achieve the stated goals of unsuppressed levels of 
harvest and consumption, it must be classified as impaired and a total maximum daily load and 
waste load allocations developed for any discharges impacting it.    
 
We also strongly support the proposed requirements for EPA to initiate tribal consultation with 
the right holders when reviewing state WQS submissions to determine if applicable reserved 
rights are protected. Tribal consultation, initiated by US EPA even before receiving a notice of 
triennial review or a WQS submission from a State, could inform the necessary scope of work to 
achieve these goals efficiently. This is authorized under CWA Section 303(c)(4)(B) authorizing 
the Administrator to determine, even in the absence of a state submission, that a new or revised 
standard is necessary to meet CWA requirements.  Once the Administrator makes such a 

Page 4 of 4 
Grand Portage Cmts. on EPA Proposed Water Quality Standards to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
GICHI ONIGAMIING- GREAT CARRYING PLACE 
 
 
determination, the agency must “promptly” propose an appropriate WQS and finalize it within 
90 days unless the state adopts an acceptable standard in the interim.10       
 
In the proposed rule, US EPA has identified two categories of circumstances that will most likely 
necessitate new or revised State WQS: (1) protection of fish consumers; and (2) protection of 
wild rice, which is of key concern in Minnesota.11 As stated previously, both wild rice and fish 
populations have decreased and consumption reduced by pollution that has impaired 
usufructuary rights in the 1854 Ceded Territory. When higher fish consumption values are 
inserted into accepted formulas to develop WQS while using the same cancer risk, the resulting 
criteria are more stringent. Besides protection of fish consumers’ health, more stringent WQS 
criteria may increase reproduction and growth of sensitive aquatic life. Adequately protecting 
wild rice under the CWA requires US EPA to deny rulemaking by the state of Minnesota that 
diminishes WQS criteria protections for wild rice and requires implementation of Total 
Maximum Daily Loads and Waste Load Allocations for waters that have been identified as 
impaired. 
 
US EPA has a fiduciary obligation to ensure that its WQS are consistent with treaties and tribal 
reserved rights. Water quality is critical to attain the unsuppressed use of aquatic trust resources.  
Adequate protection of subsistence fish consumers and wild rice require state WQS revisions. 
Grand Portage supports this long-overdue initiative to ensure full protection of tribal reserved 
rights. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
April McCormick 
Grand Portage Secretary-Treasurer     
           
 
10 WQS Regulatory Revs. to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed Reg. 74361 et seq. (Dec. 5, 2022), at 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2022/12/05/2022-26240/water-quality-standards-regulatory-revisions-
to-protect-tribal-reserved-rights. 
11 Id.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0243 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Comment period ends 3/6/23 
Federal Rulemaking Portal: https://www.reculat ons.qov/ 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 

DEPARTMENT of AGRICULTURE 
and NATURAL RESOURCES 
JOE FOSS BUILDING 
523 E CAPITOL AVE 
PIERRE SD 57501-3182 
danr.sd.gov 
March 3, 2023 
To Docket ID NO. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791: 
The South Dakota Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources (DANR) appreciates the 
opportunity to comment on the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) proposed Water Quality 
Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (proposed rule). DANR has 
reviewed the proposed rule, engaged in listening sessions, and attended webinars regarding the 
proposed rule and provides the following corhments. 
South Dakota DANR recommends EPA withdraw the proposed rule. It is evident EPA has 
not thought through this proposed process, which is merely a concept with no meaningful 
implementation or conflict resolution strategies. It is destined to create an impasse on future state 
water quality standards submissions. 
If EPA goes forward with this rulemaking, DANR requests EPA that EPA provide at least a 60-
day extension of the public comment period. This proposed rule has broad economic and 
regulatory impact in SOuth Dakota and additional time is necessary to clearly understand these 
impacts and provide further constructive comments. However, until such time as EPA withdraws 
the proposed rule or provides additional time for public comment, below are DANR's initial 
concerns with and recommended changes to the proposed rules: 
1)This rule is not necessary, because there is already a legal requirement to protect treaty 
rights and downstream uses. 
The Clean Water Act (CWA) already requires that water quality standards support downstream 
uses, which include protecting tribal reserved rights. The Preamble to the rule cites cases in 
Washington and Maine where reserved rights were determined, the exercise of those rights 
quantified, and appropriate standards to protect those rights were developed. The CWA and EPA 
expertise in developing criteria became a part of this process as a final step, after rights were 
determined. The proposed rule inverts this process placing both the determination of rights and 
exercising those rights under oversight of the triennial review process. 
In section III.C. of the preamble to this proposed rule, EPA uses the statement in the CWA Section 
511(a)(3), of the Act "shall not be construed as . . . affecting or impairing the provisions of any 
treaty of the United States." as the basis for the proposed rule. DANR believes this interpretation 
is an overreach of federal authority because EPA is reaching beyond 511(a)(3) by undertaking a 
rulemaking that will interject EPA into the determination of reserved rights and evaluation of how 
those rights are exercised. The proposal implies any and all treaties, statutes, executive order, 
and other sources of Federal law apply to all tribes and all states. 
2) EPA is assuming authority over the adjudication of rights by forcing this process 
through the States' triennial reviews and water quality standards changes. 

Essential for implementation of this rule is the identification of tribal reserved rights. EPA intends 
to act as the mediator between states and tribes to determine what tribal reserved rights exist and 
if the state adequately protects those rights. EPA does not have the authority to arbitrate or 
determine what tribal reserved rights exist. In fact, many states, including South Dakota, have not 
fully adjudicated what tribal reserved rights exist. Of additional concern is the proposed rule does 
not provide clarity that the states would have any input in EPA's determination. 
3) EPA's deliberate ambiguity with reference to Winters Rights raises questions about the 
intent of the rulemaking. 
The proposed rule states "[t]ribal reserved rights as defined in this proposed rulemaking generally 
do not address the quantification of Winters rights." By using the word "generally," EPA is not 
excluding the possibility that Winters rights may be considered as part of a tribal reserved right. 
This rulemaking should not be a backdoor approach in determining water quantification or used 
in a manner that sets precedence for which reserved rights exist. EPA does not have the legal 
authority to determine if a reserved right exists, and therefore, should not create a rule where EPA 
determines if that alleged right is protected as a part of water quality standards approval. 
4) EPA has grossly underestimated the likelihood of litigation to determine reserved rights. 
In the proposed rule, the tribal reserved rights may be held either expressly or implicitly through 
treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of Federal law. If a tribal reserved right is 
implicitly held, that determination must be made either by the states and the tribes together, 
perhaps with the assistance of the United States Bureau of Indian Affairs or adjudicated in a court 
of law. EPA did not address time or money spent in litigation when considering the economic 
impacts of the rule, and added time and money to the water quality standards rule review process. 
EPA should reevaluate the potential and economic impacts of litigation and the water quality 
standards submission and approval process timeline extensions. 
5)The proposed rule reassigns the responsibility for criteria development from EPA to the 
States. 
The CWA is clear EPA is responsible for developing and publishing criteria and methods for 
water quality. The CWA Section 304(a) identifies the duty of EPA to establish criteria and 
methods and provide this information to the states. Section 304(a)(1) provides Whe 
Administrator... shall develop and publish ... criteria for water quality accurately reflecting the 
latest scientific knowledge (A) on the kind and extent of all identifiable effects on health and 
welfare ... which may be expected from the presence of pollutants in any body of water.... The 
Administrator... shall develop and publish ... information (A) on the factors necessary to restore 
and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of all navigable waters, ground 
waters, waters of the contiguous zone, and the oceans; (B) on the factors necessary for the 
protection and propagation of shellfish, fish, and wildlife for classes and categories of receiving 
waters and to allow recreational activities in and on the water...." 
Section 304(a) further provides, "[s]uch criteria and information and revisions thereof shall be 
issued to the States and shall be published in the Federal Register and otherwise made available 
to the public. ... The Administrator shall, within 90 days after December 27, 1977, and from time 
to time thereafter, publish and revise as appropriate information identifying conventional 
pollutants.... The Administrator shall ... publish and revise as appropriate information identifying 
each water quality standard in effect under this chapter or State law, the specific pollutants 

associated with such water quality standard, and the particular waters to which such water quality 
standard applies. ... Guidance to States — The Administrator, after consultation with appropriate 
state agencies and on the basis of criteria and information published in paragraphs (1) and (2) of 
this subsection, shall develop and publish ... guidance to the States on performing the 
identification required by subsection (1)(1) of this section." 
With this proposed rule, EPA disregards their responsibility under Section 304(a)(1) and passes 
the obligation to the states, putting an undue burden on the states. 
6) The rule fails to define "aquatic or aquatic dependent resources." 
The proposed rule is intended to protect "aquatic or aquatic dependent resources"; however, the 
phrase is not defined. These terms must be defined. DANR has twice asked EPA to discuss and 
define these terms, but EPA has remained silent with no proposed definition or substantive 
information provided to the states for a better understanding of the intent. Deliberate ambiguity 
creates uncertainty about where and how the rule will apply. If EPA continues with this rulemaking, 
this term requires a definition and opportunity for the public to evaluate and provide comments. 
7) EPA does not have the authority to arbitrate how tribal rights are exercised. 
40 CFR § 131.5(a) lists the factors EPA considers in determining whether state adopted water 
quality standards are consistent with CWA section 303(c). The proposed rule adds § 131.5(a)(9), 
specifying that when reviewing new or revised standards, EPA will evaluate whether water quality 
standards sufficiently protect tribal reserved rights. However, EPA has not provided information 
or guidance on how EPA will make that determination, other than in the proposed rule, EPA 
suggests the state consult with tribes and EPA to determine the appropriate protections necessary 
to protect the reserved right. EPA does not have the authority to arbitrate how a tribal reserved 
right is exercised and the level of protection that may be necessary to protect that right. If EPA 
continues with this rulemaking, they must define the process on how EPA will determine, including 
acceptance criteria, if water quality standards sufficiently protect tribal reserved rights. 
In addition, DANR disagrees with the proposed language of § 131.5(a)(9) for three reasons: 1) 
the responsibility to develop and provide criteria and methods is the obligation of EPA, not the 
State; 2) requiring the agreement of tribal governments regarding the State's water quality 
standards infringes upon the State's right to establish water quality standards for state waters 
(either by adopting EPA criteria or developing state criteria); and 3) most states and tribes lack 
the expertise to develop state-specific water quality standards and criteria. 
8) The water quality standards process must be rooted in science, not perceptions. The 
State should not be tasked with investigating "perceived" pollution or impacts. 
Proposed 40 CFR § 131.6(g) would require states to submit "data and methods used" to develop 
water quality standards that protect tribal reserved rights. EPA recommends in the preamble that 
states request information from the right holders such as types of pollutants perceived to be 
impacting their rights, key aquatic species, and/or consumption rates that would be useful in 
developing protective water quality standards pursuant to proposed 40 CFR §131.20(a). EPA has 
not considered how states and right holders will reach an agreement on what types of pollutants 
are "perceived" to be impacting rights, who is responsible for determining if a "perceived" pollutant 
or impact is occurring, or how it is determined if the "perceived" pollutant is impacting a reserved 
right. The proposed rule should not require a state to investigate "perceived" pollutants or impacts 
without establishing a process that includes some accountability and responsibility for all parties. 
EPA should not codify a rule that simply allows a right holder to claim a "perceived" pollutant or 
impact and require the State to fully investigate that allegation. Requiring the State to act on 

"perceived" pollution or impacts will result in an endless waste of time and money. If EPA 
continues this rulemaking effort, EPA must remove any discussion of perceived impacts and 
instead provide the science necessary to reach an agreement on the impacts and the steps 
necessary to address the impacts. 
9) The proposed rule cannot reasonably be carried out within the time constraints of a rule 
change or triennial review and will likely result in time delays and failures. 
EPA is also proposing to add an element to the list of "Minimum Requirements for Water Quality 
Standards Submission" set forth in 40 CFR § 131.6. by requiring submissions to include 1) 
information about the scope, nature, and current and past use of the tribal reserved rights, as 
informed by the right holders; and 2) data and methods used to develop the water quality 
standards. EPA suggests these elements be carried out before and/or during the public 
involvement process. EPA has grossly underestimated the time involved for meaningful 
engagement on tribal reserved rights and developing water quality criteria to protect the reserved 
right. The proposed rule cannot reasonably be completed within the time constraints of a rule 
change or a triennial review. There is a broad range of possible issues including: disagreement 
on what reserved rights exist, disagreement on "perceived" pollutants or impacts, disagreement 
on the level of protection necessary to protect the reserved right, lack of available data to show 
that a "perceived" pollutant is causing an impact, lack of availability of federal resources to provide 
guidance on specific treaties, the fact that many reserved rights or water rights have not been 
identified or adjudicated, and most importantly that EPA does not have the authority to determine 
if a reserved right exists or how that right is exercised. These issues will cause delays or failures 
in adopting water quality standards in a timely manner. 
In addition, there is no obligation for EPA to consult with the tribes until the agency is reviewing a 
state's water quality standards submission. If the state invites tribes to provide input early in the 
process, there is no requirement for the tribe to timely bring issues forward. By initiating formal 
tribal consultation after the state's efforts for input, EPA is setting the stage for standards 
approvals to lag indefinitely. In South Dakota, changes to our surface water quality standards 
become state rules, with the force and effect of law, whether or not EPA approves the standards. 
South Dakota could be left in limbo where our state rules conflict with EPA-approved water quality 
standards, effecting our state's water protection efforts, limiting our ability to issue discharge 
permits, develop and implement total maximum daily loads, or issue our biennial Integrated 
Report. 
If EPA continues this rulemaking process, they must reconsider the proposed rule and its 
implications on future state rule changes and triennial reviews. There is need to protect water for 
all users, but water quality rule changes and the triennial review process are not the place to delay 
protection efforts until tribal reserved rights agreed upon. 
10) Proposed 40 CFR 131.9(a)(1) conflicts with 40 CFR 131.10(d). 
Proposed 40 CFR § 131.9(a)(1) requires water quality standards to the extent supported by 
available data be established to protect "the exercise of the tribal reserved rights unsuppressed 
by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource." This is intended to 
address situations where existing water quality is lower than what is necessary for right holders 
to fully exercise their tribal reserved rights. This proposed requirement appears to conflict with 40 
CFR § 131.10(d) "fejt a minimum, uses are deemed attainable if they can be achieved by the 
imposition of effluent limits required under sections 301(b) and 306 of the Act and cost-effective 
and reasonable best management practices for nonpoint source control." The proposed rule 
requires water quality standards be established to protect tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by 
water quality or the availability of the aquatic resource regardless if the use is attainable. DANR 

recommends that if EPA continues with this rulemaking, they revise the proposed rule to address 
"unsuppressed" in terms of achievable and attainable. Additionally, by requiring the water quality 
standards to protect the reserved right unsuppressed by water quality, there is a likelihood states 
would be forced to set water quality standards that are not achievable. This will result in waters 
listed on the state's Section 303(d) list of impaired waters, and subsequently a total maximum 
daily load would be required. Again, DANR believes the EPA has grossly underestimated the 
economic impact of the proposed rule and recommends EPA reevaluate the economic impact to 
fully discuss the anticipated outcomes of the rule. This should include items such as increasing 
the state's workload with additional total maximum daily loads efforts without providing any 
increase in funding or other resources. 
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide comments on the proposed rulemaking. South 
Dakota DANR cannot support this rule and respectfully requests EPA withdraw the proposed 
rules. If EPA moves forward with the rule, please address the above concerns to avoid 
unintentional consequences of the rulemaking. Thank you. 
Sincerely, 
Hunter Roberts 
Secretary 
cc: 
Marty Jackley, Attorney General

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0172 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
To whom it may concern, 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the revision of the Clean Water Act (CWA) to include 
tribal reserved rights in efforts to uphold the nations promise in early U.S. treaties. I am a member of 
the Osage Nation, living outside of my tribal ‘reservation’ and home state. I am speaking to you not only 
as a tribal member but a dedicated environmental health and safety professional. I have many years’ 
experience working with environmental and tribal organizations in my home state of Oklahoma, as well 
as a masters student of Environmental Health & Policy at University of Denver, in Colorado.
I also had the pleasure of sitting in on the public comment presentation, which was provided by 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Here, only one individual (I believe named Dirk Dunning) was 
prepared to comment, but his statement (and I am paraphrasing) must not be forgotten “…Almost any 
tribal lands you could imagine, you will see environmental injustice”. One of the barriers to ensuring 
environmental justice to all U.S. tribal citizens is appropriate surveying; as “the EPA does not have 
reliable data identifying National Priorities List (NPL) sites that are located on tribal property or that 
affect tribes” (GAO). To quote another public commenter “identifying tribal lands is the first step to 
“fulfilling treaty promises to [ensure] that the [Water Quality Standards (WQS)] are protective of tribal 
reserved rights, including the rights to fish, hunt, and gather, as well as other cultural and spiritual uses 
of the waters.” (Stroupe). 
We must ensure that in the language of this revision that we include tribal-partnership and participation 
in setting WQS and designated uses of water; tribal designated uses and risks of exposure will be 
uniquely different from general U.S. populations. Factors such as tribal (varied dependent on 
region/creed) cultural ceremonies/practices and preservation of traditions all play individually into 
designated use. Tribal persons should be able to interact safely with waters used for their unique 
cultural and traditional practices (tribal designated use). Waterways that are used for such practices 
should be protected and any impairment to those waters-a breach of the CWA as it relates to tribal 
reserved rights. 
This is exemplified by the State of California Water Board: ‘tribal beneficial uses’: “…tribes have used, 
and in some cases continue to use, water to support their cultural, spiritual, ceremonial, and/or 
traditional rights” (CWB). The CWA lacks detail related to water depletion in large swaths of U.S. tribal 
territories, especially the “30 tribes within the Colorado River Basin (CRB)” due to U.S. water engineering 
practices, which must not be left out in this revision. An estimated one in ten Indigenous Americans lack 
access to safe tap water or basic sanitation..” (Lakhani, 2021)
Lastly, we must ensure that the CWA revisions works to include tribal leaders in all U.S. research and 
water quality assessments or environmental assessments, or any other pertinent information found by 
the U.S. government or entities about the waters that support tribal territories and lands. Information 
about water quality should never be withheld. 
Respectfully, 
Madeline Geiger 

References: 
California Water Boards (CWB). 23 January 2023. “Tribal Beneficial Uses Designations”. Accessed 
February 17, 2023. Tribal Beneficial Uses Designations | Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control 
Board (ca.gov)
Lakhani, Nina. 28 April, 2021. “Tribes without clean water demand an end to decades of U.S. 
government neglect. Accessed on February 17th, 2023. Tribes without clean water demand an end to 
decades of US government neglect | US news | The Guardian
Stroupe, Jackson. 10 January 2023. Public Submission on EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0159. Accessed on 
February 17, 2023. Regulations.gov
U.S. Government Accountability Office (GAO). 23 January, 2019. “ Superfund: EPA Should Improve the 
Reliability of Data on National Priorities List Sites Affecting Indian Tribes. Accessed on February 17, 2023. 
Superfund: EPA Should Improve the Reliability of Data on National Priorities List Sites Affecting Indian 
Tribes | U.S. GAO

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0276 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
 
RE:  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791; FRL-8599-01-OW 
 
To Whom it May Concern: 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this important issue. The State of Oklahoma is 
different from other states in that under federal law, Oklahoma has authority to seek approval 
from the EPA to administer in certain areas of Indian country the State’s environmental 
regulatory programs that were previously approved by the EPA.  
 
EPA granted such authority and we have attached the agency’s approval letter of October 1, 
2020, for the record. We respectfully request that EPA honor the authority that it granted to 
the State of Oklahoma. 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide these comments. Thank you for your consideration in 
this matter. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Marla Peek 
Sr. Director of Regulatory Affairs 
 
cc: 
OKFB Board of Directors 
 
Ken McQueen, Oklahoma Secretary of Energy and Environment 
 
Scott Thompson, Executive Director Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality 
 
Blayne Arthur, Oklahoma Secretary of Agriculture 
 
Attachment: Oct. 1, 2020, Letter from EPA to Governor Stitt 
 
 

.cD S1
(%)
L PRO
UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20460
October 1, 2020
THE ADMINISTRATOR
The Honorable J. Kevin Stitt
Governor of the State of Oklahoma
Oklahoma State Capitol
2300 North Lincoln Boulevard
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 73105
Re:
Approval of State of Oklahoma Request Under Section 10211(a) of the
Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act of 2005
Dear Governor Stitt:
On July 22, 2020, the Governor ofthe State ofOklahoma requested approval under Section
102 11(a) of the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient Transportation Equity Act of 2005: A
Legacy for Users, Pub. Law 109-59, 199 Stat. 1144, 1937 (August 10, 2005) ("SAFETEA"), to
administer in certain areas of Indian country the State's environmental regulatory programs that
were previously approved by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ("EPA") outside of
Indian country. EPA hereby approves Oklahoma's request.
SAFETEA
The applicable provision of SAFETEA, which is limited to Oklahoma, states as follows:
SEC. 10211. ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS.
(a) OKLAHOMA.-Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the Administrator of
the Environmental Protection Agency (referred to in this section as the "Administrator")
determines that a regulatory program submitted by the State of Oklahoma for approval by
the Administrator under a law administered by the Administrator meets applicable
requirements of the law, and the Administrator approves the State to administer the State
program under the law with respect to areas in the State that are not Indian country, on
request of the State, the Administrator shall approve the State to administer the State
program in the areas of the State that are in Indian country, without any further
demonstration of authority by the State.

Pub. Law 109-59, 199 Stat. 1144, 1937.
EPA recognizes that typically, in the absence ofexpress authorization from Congress states
do not have jurisdiction in Indian country' to implement regulatory programs under the federal
environmental laws administered by EPA. See, e.g., Alaska v. Native Village of Venetie Tribal
Gov't, 522 U.S. 520, 527 n.1 (1998). Therefore, EPA generally excludes Indian country from its
approvals of state environmental regulatory programs. However, where a federal statute expressly
provides for state program administration in Indian country, EPA must apply that law and approve
a proper request for such state administration.
Section 10211(a) of SAFETEA is such a law. The statute mandates that EPA approve a
request from the State of Oklahoma to administer regulatory programs in areas of the State that
are in Indian country where the statute's elements are met. The statute applies to (1) any regulatory
program, (2) submitted by Oklahoma for approval by EPA under a law administered by EPA,
where EPA has (3) determined that the program meets applicable requirements ofthe law, and (4)
approved the program with respect to areas in the State that are not Indian country, and (5) the
State requests to administer the program in areas of the State that are in Indian country. So long as
these
circumstances
are
present,
SAFETEA
requires
approval
of the
State's
request
"[n]otwithstanding any other provision of law" and "without any further demonstration of
authority by the State." Consistent with Congress's plenary authority over Indian affairs, the statute
expressly abrogates any prior potentially inconsistent legal requirement or limitation of law,
including any potential jurisdictional impediment to the State's regulation in Indian country or
other requirement under federal environmental laws administered by EPA. The statute provides
EPA no discretion to weigh additional factors in rendering its decision.
Oklahoma's
July
2020
request
seeks
approval
under
SAFETEA
to
administer
environmental regulatory programs submitted by the State that EPA has determined meet
applicable requirements of federal environmental law and has approved outside ofIndian country.2
Because these basic statutory criteria are met, EPA is required to approve the State's request to
Section 10211 of SAFETEA does not define Indian country. Indian country, however, is defined under federal
law at 18 U.S.C. § 1151 to mean (a) all land within the limits of any Indian reservation under the jurisdiction of the
United States Government, notwithstanding the issuance of any patent, and, including rights-of-way running through
the reservation, (b) all dependent Indian communities within the borders of the United States whether within the
original or subsequently acquired territory thereof, and whether within or without the limits of a state, and (c) all
Indian allotments, the Indian titles to which have not been extinguished, including rights-of-way running through the
same. Although this definition is codified in the federal criminal code, it is also relevant for purposes of civil
jurisdiction. See, e.g., DeCoteau v. District County Court, 420 U.S. 425, 427 n.2 (1975).
2 As described above, Section 10211(a) requires approval ofthe State's request where EPA previously has determined
that a regulatory program submitted by the State meets applicable requirements of federal environmental law, and
EPA has approved the program to apply outside of Indian country. EPA interprets the required determination that the
State's program meets applicable requirements of federal environmental law as applying at the time the program was
previously approved outside of Indian country. This is consistent with Congress's intent to mandate approval of the
State's request under SAFETEA "[notwithstanding any other provision of law," which includes the provisions ofthe
statutes administered by EPA. Although SAFETEA thus mandates approval in the first instance, EPA notes that the
Agency's ordinary statutory and regulatory authorities to oversee and review state programs will continue to apply as
the programs are implemented.
2

administer these previously approved regulatory programs in the areas of Indian country described
in the State's request.
Geographic Scope of Approval
As described in the State's July 2020 letter, the impetus for the State's request was the
recent decision of the U.S. Supreme Court in McGirt v. Oklahoma, 140 S.Ct. 2452 (2020). In that
case, the Supreme Court held that the Creek Nation's Reservation in eastern Oklahoma had not
been disestablished by Congress and remained Indian country under federal law. Prior to McGirt,
the State had, as a practical matter, implemented environmental programs in much of the area that
was held by the Supreme Court to be Indian country. EPA understands the State's reference to
McGirt as an explanation of the State's intent substantially to reestablish the geographic scope of
the State's environmental programs as implemented prior to the Supreme Court's decision, but at
this time generally not to extend the State's programs into areas of Indian country over which the
State had not previously implemented such programs.3 In keeping with this general intent, the
State's request applies to Indian country throughout the State, but expressly excludes three
categories of land over which the State had not administered regulatory programs prior to McGirt.
As stated in the request:
This request does not seek approval to administer any programs in Indian country on lands,
including rights-of-way running through the same, that -
(A) Qualify as Indian allotments, the Indian titles to which have not been extinguished,
under 18 U.S.C. § 1151(c);
(B) Are held in trust by the United States on behalf of an individual Indian or Tribe; or
(C) Are owned in fee by a Tribe, if the Tribe -
(i) acquired that fee title to such land, or an area that included such land, in accordance
with a treaty with the United States to which such Tribe was a party; and
(ii) never allotted the land to a member or citizen of the Tribe.
EPA has identified two instances in which the State's July 2020 request deviates from the geographic scope of the
State's programs as implemented prior to McGirt. First, the State's request seeks extension of its Safe Drinking Water
Act Underground Injection Control Program (other than Class II wells) into Osage County. Prior to McGirt, EPA had
regulated all classes of wells under this program in that county. Second, consistent with the D.C. Circuit's decision in
Oklahoma Dept. ofEnvironmental Quality v. EPA, 740 F.3d 185 (D.C. Cir. 2014), the State's Clean Air Act State
Implementation Plan ("SIP") applies on non-reservation areas of Indian country - most notably, Indian allotments -
in the State. Prior to McGirt, the State had thus implemented its SIP on Indian allotments, including allotments that
are now understood (per the Supreme Court's decision) to be located within the exterior boundaries of an Indian
reservation. To the extent an allotment is located on an Indian reservation, it would be excluded from the D.C. Circuit's
holding that SIPs apply on non-reservation areas of Indian country. The State's July 2020 request excludes Indian
allotments, and thus does not request extension of Oklahoma's SIP onto such reservation allotments.
3

The request also expressly excludes the Safe Drinking Water Act Class II Underground
Injection Control program in Osage County, Oklahoma.4
Consistent with the State's letter, EPA's approval of the State's request applies to Indian
country throughout the State but does not extend to any of the excluded areas. EPA will retain
authority to directly implement environmental regulatory programs under statutes administered by
the Agency in all such excluded areas. Nothing in this decision is intended to change or address
tribal authority under tribal law outside the scope of a program under a statute administered by
EPA.
Programmatic Scope of Approval
The State's July 2020 letter requests approval under SAFETEA with regard to all of the
State's existing EPA-approved environmental regulatory programs,5 including a series of
programs identified in the letter that are administered by the Oklahoma Department of
Environmental Quality, the Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food and Forestry, the
Oklahoma Water Resources Board, and the Oklahoma Corporation Commission. Consistent with
the State's request, EPA is approving the State under SAFETEA to administer all environmental
regulatory programs approved by EPA to apply outside of Indian country, including, but not
limited to, the environmental regulatory programs identified below. Each of the programs covered
by this approval has been submitted to EPA - i.e., they involve a submission by the State for EPA's
consideration under a law administered by EPA
- and approved by EPA as meeting applicable
requirements of federal environmental law outside of Indian country. These programs thus satisfy
the necessary criteria of SAFETEA Section 10211(a). To the extent EPA's prior approvals ofthese
State programs excluded Indian country, any such exclusions are superseded for the geographic
areas of Indian country covered by this approval under SAFETEA. Because each of the programs
identified below is now approved to include the requested areas of Indian country, any future
revisions or amendments to these identified programs will similarly extend to the covered areas of
Indian country without any further need for additional requests under SAFETEA.6
"Section 102 11(a) of SAFETEA does not specify any required minimum geographic area of Indian country to be
included in a request from Oklahoma. EPA interprets the provision as providing sufficient flexibility for the State to
exclude certain areas of Indian country from its request and to mandate EPA approval of such a limited request so
long as the basic criteria of the statute are met.
Section 10211(a) of SAFETEA addresses only "regulatory program[s]" administered under federal environmental
laws. The provision does not address funding provided under EPA grant programs. The provision also does not address
any exercise of State regulatory authority outside the scope of a program approved by EPA under a federal
environmental statute administered by EPA.
6 However, should the State apply to EPA in the future for approval of any program that has not been previously
approved outside of Indian country, the State would also need to submit a request under SAFETEA to the extent the
State wishes to administer that program in any area of Indian country. This is consistent with the language of Section
10211(a), which contemplates that a request from Oklahoma will relate to a regulatory program that has already been
submitted to EPA and approved by EPA to apply outside of Indian country.

List of Programs7
RCRA:
¯
Subtitle C hazardous waste program (42 U.S.C. § 6921, etseq.; 40 C.F.R. Part 272, Subpart
LL)
¯
Subtitle D permit program (42 U.S.C. § 6941, et seq.; 40 C.F.R. Parts 239 and 258)
¯
Coal Combustion Residual State Program (42 U.S.C. § 6945(d); 40 C.F.R. Part 257,
Subpart D)
¯
Subtitle I Underground Storage Tank Program (42 U.S.C. § 6991, et seq.; 40 C.F.R. §
282.86)
CAA:
¯
State Implementation Plan (42 U.S.C. § 7410; 40 C.F.R. Part 52, Subpart LL - 40 C.F.R.
§
52.1920 -52.1960)
¯
Standards ofPerformance for New Stationary Sources (42 U.S.C. § 7411(b) and (c), 7429;
40 C.F.R. Part 60
¯
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (42 U.S.C. § 7412; 40 C.F.R.
Part 61, Subpart A-40 C.F.R. § 61.04(b)(38) and § 61.04(c)(6)(iv))
¯
Approval and Promulgation of State Plans for Designated Facilities and Pollutants (42
U.S.C. §
7411(d) and 7429; 40 C.F.R. Part 62, Subpart LL
- 40 C.F.R. §
62.9100
-
62.919 1)
¯
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants, Delegation Status for Part 63
Standards-State of Oklahoma (42 U.S.C. § 7412; 40 C.F.R. Part 63, Subpart A
- 40
C.F.R. § 63.99(a)(37))
¯
State Operating Permits Program (42 U.S.C. §
7661a(d)
- 7661f; 40 C.F.R. Part 70,
Appendix A, Oklahoma)
¯
Ambient Air Monitoring Reference and Equivalent Methods and Ambient Air Quality
Surveillance, 42 U.S.C. §
7601(a), 7619 (40 C.F.R. Parts 53 and 58)
CWA:
¯
Pretreatment (33 U.S.C. § 1317; 40 C.F.R. Parts 129 and 403)
¯
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Programs authorized for Oklahoma
Department of Environmental Quality and Oklahoma Department of Agriculture, Food,
and Forestry (33 U.S.C. § 1342; 40 C.F.R. Parts 122-125)
¯
Disposal of Biosolids and Sewage Sludge (33 U.S.C. § 1345; 40 C.F.R. Part 503)
¯
Water Quality Standards and Implementation plans (33 U.S.C. § 1313; 40 C.F.R. Parts 130
and 131)
EPA has reorganized the list of regulatory programs included in Oklahoma's July 2020 letter to track the statutes
administered by EPA, avoid unnecessary references and duplication, and reference relevant statutory and regulatory
provisions that reflect the requested programs. Consistent with the State's request to include all regulatory programs
approved by EPA outside of Indian country (and the statement that the list of programs included in the July 2020 letter
was non-exclusive), EPA has included certain regulatory programs that were not separately identified in the State's
July 2020 letter. Because Section 10211(a) of SAFETEA applies only to regulatory programs, EPA has not included
any references to environmental grant authorities under EPA statutes or regulations that were included in the State's
July 2020 letter.

SDWA:
¯
Underground Injection Control (UIC) Program for Classes I, II (excluding Osage County,
Oklahoma), III, IV and V wells, (42 U.S.C. §
300h-300h-8; 40 C.F.R. §
147.1850 and
1851)
¯
Public Drinking Water System Program (42 U.S.C. § 300f, etseq.; 40 C.F.R. Part 143-149)
FIFRA
¯
State Pesticides Certification and Training Plan (7 U.S.C. §136i; 40 C.F.R. Part 171)
¯
Experimental Use Permits (7 U.S.C. § 136c; 40 C.F.R. Part 172)
¯
Delegated State Enforcement and Training (7 U.S.C. § 136u)
¯
Enforcement Primacy (7 U.S.C. § 136w-i)
¯
Public Health, Quarantine, and Crisis Exemptions (7 U.S.C. § 136p; 40 C.F.R. Part 166)
¯
Special Local Needs Registrations (7 U.S.C. § 136v; 40 C.F.R. Part 162)
TSCA
¯
Lead-Based Paint Activities in Target Housing and Child-Occupied Facilities ("Lead-
Based Paint Program") (15 U.S.C. § 2682; 40 C.F.R. Part 745)
¯
Lead-Based Paint Renovation, Repair and Painting, and Pre-Renovation Education
Activities in Target Housing and Child Occupied Facilities (15 U.S.C. § 2684; 40 C.F.R.
Part 745)
¯
Asbestos in Schools (15 U.S.C. § 2643; 40 C.F.R. Part 763)
Tribal Consultation
EPA greatly values its government-to-government relationships with the federally
recognized tribes in Oklahoma. Section
10211(a) of SAFETEA includes no procedural
requirements to govern EPA's mandatory decision. However, consistent with longstanding
Agency policy,8 EPA invited Indian tribes located in Oklahoma to consult with the Agency and to
provide their views regarding the State's July 2020 request. On September 8, 2020, EPA conducted
a tribal consultation meeting open to all tribes in Oklahoma. The Agency also conducted individual
consultation meetings with seven tribes in Oklahoma. EPA has carefully reviewed and considered
input provided by the tribes in developing this decision.
Consistent with the Agency's various statutory and regulatory authorities, EPA will
continue to exercise oversight of the State's environmental programs as they are implemented
throughout Oklahoma, including in the areas of Indian country covered by this approval, consistent
with its general trust responsibility to federally recognized tribes. EPA encourages coordination
and cooperation among the tribes, the State, and EPA, and the Agency is prepared to work
collaboratively with our inter-governmental partners on environmental issues of mutual interest.
See, e.g., EPA Policy for the Administration of Environmental Programs on Indian Reservations, November 8, 1984;
EPA Policy on Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribes, May 4, 2011.

Conclusion
As required by Section 102 11(a) of SAFETEA, EPA approves the State of Oklahoma's
July 22, 2020, request to administer the environmental regulatory programs described above in the
specified areas of Indian country.
Andrew R. Wheeler
7

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0247 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Y U ROK  T R I B E
190 Klamath Boulevard • Post Office Box 1027 • Klamath, CA 95548 
Phone: (707) 482-1350 • Fax: (707) 482-1377 
March 6, 2023 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of the Administrator, 1101A  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.  
Washington, DC 20460 
 Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal: https://www.regulations.gov/ 
Re: Revisions to the Federal Water Quality Standards Regulations to Protect Tribal Reserved 
Rights, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791  
 Aiy-ye-kwee’ Administrator Regan, 
The Yurok Tribe (Tribe), a sovereign nation and federally recognized Indian Tribe, appreciates 
the opportunity to express its general support for, and provide substantive comments1 on, the 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed revisions to the Clean Water Act (CWA) water 
quality standards (WQS) regulations at 40 C.F.R. § 131 (Proposed Regulations).2 The Yurok Tribe 
commends EPA’s efforts to require states to evaluate tribal reserved rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-
dependent resources in an area or downstream of an area when developing new and revised WQS. 
Overall, the proposed regulations represent a crucial step toward ensuring reserved rights to aquatic 
and aquatic-dependent resources are protected for federally recognized Tribes and their members.  
However, the Tribe suggests additional language to the Proposed Regulations to further 
support Tribal sovereignty, further increase protection of aquatic and non-aquatic resources to 
reduce exposure risk to Tribal members and further enhance physical and cultural wellbeing of 
Tribal members, and to further increase protection of Tribal reserved rights. To that end, the Tribe 
writes to express concerns with specific aspects of the Proposed Rule to ensure that the Yurok 
People can meaningfully exercise their fishing rights while ensuring their health and safety—and the 
health and safety of the resources themselves—are adequately protected. Some of these concerns 
include: (1) ensuring states submit data consistent with long term restoration efforts and traditional 
ecological knowledge (TEK) provided by tribes; (2) specifying compliance with federal statutes such 
as the Endangered Species Act (ESA); (3) ensuring long-term restoration projects are considered 
when determining the unsuppressed level of an aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource; and (4) 
1 The Yurok Tribe thanks JoAnn Kintz and Maher Mahmood from Democracy Forward and Nazune Menka, Megan 
Pynes, Tiana Wilson-Blindman, Lauren Havey, Laura Tepper, and Amaya Ramsey-Malone from the University of 
Berkeley Environmental Law Clinic for their assistance in drafting these comments.
2 40 C.F.R. §§ 131.3 (adding definitions for “tribal reserved rights” and “rights holders”), 131.5 (adding “tribal reserved 
rights” to factors EPA considers), 131.6 (requiring state documentation of consideration of “tribal reserved rights”), 
131.9 (adding “tribal reserved rights” and substantive and procedural requirements for their addition to WQS) and 
131.20 (adding evaluation of whether there are tribal reserved rights applicable to waters subject to the state's WQS 
and whether WQS need to be revised to protect those rights). 

 
 
Page 2 
 
 
ensuring the acceptable risk of cancer rate under the proposed regulations sufficiently protects tribal 
subsistence communities. 
I. The Tribe is a Relevant Rights Holder 
The Yurok Tribe is the largest Native nation within California with over 6,400 members. 
The Yurok People have always lived along the Pacific Coast and inland on the Klamath River. As 
stated in the Yurok Constitution: 
 
The Ancestral Lands of the Yurok Tribe extend unbroken along the Pacific Ocean coast 
(including usual and customary offshore fishing areas) from Damnation Creek, its northern 
boundary, to the southern boundary of the Little River drainage basin, and unbroken along 
the Klamath River, including both sides and its bed, from its mouth upstream to and 
including the Bluff Creek drainage basin. Included within these lands are the drainage basin 
of Wilson Creek, the drainage basins of all streams entering the Klamath River from its 
mouth upstream to and including the Bluff Creek and Slate Creek drainage basins, including 
the village site at Big Bar (except for the drainage basin upstream from the junction of Pine 
Creek and Snow Camp Creek), and the Canyon Creek (also known as Tank Creek) drainage 
basin of the Trinity River, the drainage basins of streams entering the ocean or lagoons 
between the Klamath River and Little River (except for the portion of the Redwood Creek 
drainage basin beyond the McArthur Creek drainage basin, and except for the portion of the 
Little River drainage basin which lies six miles up from the ocean). Our Ancestral Lands 
include all submerged lands, and the beds, banks and waters of all the tributaries within the 
territory just described. Also included within the Ancestral Lands is a shared interest with 
other tribes in ceremonial high country sites and trails as known by the Tribe, as well as the 
Tribe’s usual and customary hunting, fishing and gathering sites.3 
 
The Yurok Tribe has both express and implied reserved rights through the executive order 
that established the Yurok Reservation,4 the Hoopa-Yurok Settlement Act of 1988 (HYSA) and the 
Winters doctrine. As the Ninth Circuit explained in Metlakatla, “[t]he type of legal instrument that 
establishes a reservation […] makes no difference to our inquiry into a tribe’s attendant resource 
rights.”5   
 
The Yurok Reservation was established by executive order on November 16, 1855, pursuant 
to the authority granted by the Act of March 3, 18536 and the Act of March 3, 1855,7 which authorized 
the President to establish reservations for “Indian purposes” in California.8 The Reservation is 
comprised of the lower forty-five miles of the Klamath River, a mile on either side, from the Yurok 
village of Req-woi at the mouth of the Klamath River to upstream of the Yurok village of Weych-
pues. Though the executive order is silent as to the Yurok’s right to water, under the reserved water 
rights doctrine established in Winters v. United States, 207 U.S. 564 (1908) (Winters doctrine) and its 
progeny, the Yurok Tribe has an implied right to the “amount of water necessary to fulfill the purpose 
 
3 The Yurok Constitution, Article 1, Section 1.  
4 See Mattz v. Arnett, 412 U.S. 481, 484 (1973). 
5 Metlakatla Indian Cmty. v. Dunleavy, 58 F.4th 1034, 1046, 2023 WL 1421500 (9th Cir. 2023). 
6 10 Stat. 226, 238. 
7 10 Stat. 686, 699. 
8 See Mattz, 412 U.S. at 487. 

 
 
Page 3 
 
 
of the reservation.”9 The Yurok Reservation was established on the lower Klamath River so the Tribe 
could maintain its fishing and river-centric way of life, reserving to the Tribe fishing and water rights 
to support that lifestyle and conferring a legal duty on the federal government to protect those rights.10  
The Klamath River and its fishery are “not much less necessary to the existence of the [Yurok] than 
the atmosphere they breathe[.]”11   
 
In addition to the rights asserted above, the Yurok Tribe has specified reserved rights as 
outlined by the HYSA.12 In recognizing the two distinct reservations for the Yurok and Hoopa Valley 
Tribes, the HYSA declared that “[t]he unallotted trust land and assets” would be held in trust by the 
United States for the benefit of the two Tribes.13 The legislation also established and confirmed “the 
property interests of the Yurok Tribe…including its interest in the fishery, enabling the Tribe to 
organize and assume governing authority.”14 As Congress and the United States Supreme Court have 
recognized, access and relationship with the waters and fish within them are inseparable from the 
existence of and relationship between the Yurok Tribe and the land.15  
 
The Yurok People, the Tribe’s inherent sovereignty, and the Yurok Constitution provide the 
Tribal government authority to create Yurok laws, manage Yurok lands and natural resources, and 
adjudicate violations of Yurok laws in Yurok Tribal Court. The Yurok Tribe’s jurisdiction extends 
throughout the Yurok Ancestral Territory and “to all of its members wherever located, to all persons 
throughout its territory, and within its territory, over all lands, waters, riverbeds, submerged lands, 
properties, air space, minerals, fish, forests, wildlife, and other resources, and any interest therein now 
or in the future.”16 Via the adoption of the Yurok Constitution, the Yurok Tribe, in its governing 
authority, strives to:  
1) Preserve forever the survival of our tribe and protect it from forces which may threaten its 
existence;  
2) Uphold and protect our tribal sovereignty which has existed from time immemorial and 
which remains undiminished; 
3) Reclaim the tribal land base within the Yurok Reservation and enlarge the Reservation 
boundaries to the maximum extent possible within the ancestral lands of our tribe and/or 
within any compensatory land area;  
4) Preserve and promote our culture, language, and religious beliefs and practices, and pass 
them on to our children, our grandchildren, and to their children and grandchildren on, 
forever;  
5) Provide for the health, education, economy, and social wellbeing of our members and future 
members;  
6) Restore, enhance, and manage the tribal fishery, tribal water rights, tribal forests, and all 
other natural resources; and  
 
9 Cappaert v. United States, 426 U.S. 128, 141 (1976). 
10 See Baley v. United States, 942 F.3d 1312, 1335 (Fed. Cir. 2019); Klamath Water Users Protective Ass’n v. Patterson, 204 F.3d 
1206, 1213 (9th Cir. 1999); Parravano v. Babbitt, 70 F.3d 539, 541 (9th Cir. 1995). 
11 Blake v. Arnett, 663 F.2d 906, 909 (9th Cir. 1981) (quoting United States v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371, 381 (1905)). 
12 25 U.S.C. § 1300i available at PL 100–580 (S 2723), PL 100–580, October 31, 1988, 102 Stat 2924. 
13 Id. at § 1300i-1(b) & (c) (emphasis added). 
14 Parravano v. Babbitt, 70 F.3d 539, 546 (9th Cir. 1995) (citing S.R. 564, 100th Cong., 2d Sess., 2–9 (1988); H.R. 938, Pt. 1, 
100th Cong., 2d Sess., 8–15). 
15 See Mattz, 412 U.S. at 487–88 (1973) (iterating that a specific, primary purpose for establishing the reservation was to 
secure to the Indians the access and right to fish without interference from others). 
16 Yurok Const. art. I, § 3. 

 
 
Page 4 
 
 
7) Ensure peace, harmony, and protection of individual human rights among our members 
and among others who may come within the jurisdiction of our tribal government.17  
 
Accordingly, the Tribe has a vested interest as a “rights holder” under the Proposed Regulations 
and submits the following substantive comments in support of its inherent Tribal sovereignty over 
aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources both on and off reservation, in support of the physical, 
cultural, economic, and social wellbeing of its members, and for the restoration and enhancement of 
Tribal natural resources, fisheries, waters, and forests. 
 
A. History of the Klamath River 
Water quality is of great importance to the Yurok Tribe, since a substantial portion of its 
history, culture, identity, spirituality, and economy is derived from the Klamath River and its 
resources. The River is considered the lifeblood of the people.18 Because of this intrinsic relationship 
between Yurok People and the River, one of the Tribe’s highest priorities is to protect and preserve 
the resources of the Klamath River in order to sustain the future of the Yurok People.  
 
When the Klamath Reservation was first established in 1855,19 the River had many fish 
species including salmon, steelhead, eulachon, lamprey, and green sturgeon.20 Today, Klamath River 
fish populations are a small fraction of their historic amounts. Over the past century, drought 
conditions and the ecological impacts of the Klamath River dams and their artificial reservoirs 
(which blocked key inland routes the salmon rely on) have resulted in low flows, increased water 
temperatures, poor water quality, significant fish habitat degradation, and habitat loss. These effects 
have had a devastating impact on the fisheries and the Yurok People. Numerous other land and 
water management practices have led to a decline in the Tribe’s access to its fishery resources, 
including gold mining, timber harvest, road construction, cattle grazing, and water diversions.21 
 
Low flows and warmer temperatures have caused repeated outbreaks of parasites among 
salmon leading to extreme mortality rates. In 2002, a catastrophic fish kill, known as the “Klamath 
Fish Kill,” left over 70,000 adult salmon dead along the banks of the Klamath River.22 Less than 
twenty years later, another catastrophic fish kill occurred. In 2021, over 70 percent of the young, 
 
17 Yurok Const. pmbl. 
18 Kathleen Sloan, Yurok and the Klamath River: Yurok Historical Context and Data for Assessing Current Conditions and 
the Effects of the proposed Klamath Restoration Project on Yurok Tribal Trust Assets and Yurok Resources of Cultural and 
Religious Significance, 3 (Feb. 2011),  https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/dam-migration/yurok_klamath_doi_2011.pdf. 
19 Mattz v. Arnett, 412 U.S. 481, 484 (1973). 
20 Sloan, supra note 18, at 4.  
21 Laurel Gonzeli et al., Klamath Dam Removal Science Coordination Workshop Summary Report (Feb.11, 2021), 
https://www.yuroktribe.org/_files/ugd/23c897_a9b7fadb1e1e4b16b1cea02287f02d4c.pdf. 
22 The Yurok Tribe, Federal Regulators Green Light Largest River Restoration Project in US History (Nov. 17, 2022), 
https://www.yuroktribe.org/post/federal-regulators-green-light-largest-river-restoration-project-in-us-history; Michael 
Belchik et al., The Klamath River Fish Kill of 2002; Analysis of Contributing Factors, Yurok Tribal Fisheries Program (Feb. 
2004),  
https://www.waterboards.ca.gov/waterrights/water_issues/programs/bay_delta/california_waterfix/exhibits/docs/PCFF
A&IGFR/part2/pcffa_155.pdf 

 
 
Page 5 
 
 
ocean-bound Chinook salmon, the only commercial salmon remaining in the Klamath River,23 were 
killed by a parasitic infection.24 While the parasite—Ceratonova shasta—is naturally occurring, 
conditions, such as drought spurred on by climate change, and man-made factors, such as the four 
hydroelectric dams on the mainstem of the Klamath, increase the prevalence of the disease 
exponentially.25 More recently, the Mckinney Fire in California destroyed more than 45,000 acres of 
forest impacting the Klamath River. Debris from the fire, in combination with an intense 
thunderstorm, led to landslides that thickened the River with mud for 155 miles, causing oxygen 
levels in the River to drop and killing tens of thousands fish.26 In addition to fish kill, there was a 
prolonged drought between late 2011 to early 2017,27and again in 2021,28 when inflows with the 
Klamath Basin were at historic low levels. These are but a few examples of the conditions that the 
Yurok Tribe and Yurok People have had to endure over the past twenty years.  
 
Climate change continues to be a threat to the Yurok Tribe. According to the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (“NOAA”), based on 30-year averages, the Klamath 
Basin is increasingly warmer and dryer. Climate change has resulted in: 1) loss of snowpack and 
higher water temperatures that threaten the salmon and other resources of the Klamath River; 2) 
increased demand for scarce water supplies; 3) greater precipitation extremes (drought to flood 
cycle); 4) sea level rise; 5) land and fire management; and 6) community health issues.29  
 
Degraded conditions on the Klamath River and dramatic declines in fish population have 
wrought extraordinary economic, spiritual, and cultural hardships on Yurok members. 
 
● Economic: From 2016–2021, the Yurok Tribe closed its commercial fishery, including its 
subsistence fishery in 2017, based on the record-low salmon returns.30 In 2020, the Yurok 
Tribe’s Fall Chinook allocation was 6,906 adult fish, which is far below necessary to meet 
 
23 Juliet Grable, In the Klamath River Basin, the Drought Punishes Everyone, Sierra (June 4, 2021), 
https://www.sierraclub.org/sierra/klamath-river-basin-drought-punishes-everyone. 
24 Id.  
25 Id.  
26 Scott Harding, Klamath River Devastated by Wildfire-Related Fish Kill, Hyropower Reform Coalition (Aug. 9, 2022), 
https://hydroreform.org/2022/08/klamath-river-devastated-by-wildfire-related-fish-kill/. 
27 See Grable supra note 23.  
28 Cong. Rsch. Serv., IN11689, Drought in the Klamath River Basin 1 (2022), 
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IN/IN11689/3#:~:text=Recent%20Drought%20and%20Federal%20Respon
se,for%20irrigators%20(Figure%202). 
29Testimony of the Yurok Tribe before the House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on 
Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Regarding the Impact of Climate Change to the Yurok Tribe (Mar. 6, 2019), 
https://docs.house.gov/meetings/AP/AP06/20190306/109006/HHRG-116-AP06-Wstate-JamesJ-20190306.pdf; Yurok 
Tribe: Climate Change Adaptation Plan for Water and Aquatic Resources, Northern Arizona University: Institute for 
Tribal Environmental Professionals, 
https://www7.nau.edu/itep/main/tcc/Tribes/pn_yurok#:~:text=Traditional%20Aquatic%20Species%3A%20Climate%20
effects,access%20%E2%80%93%20for%20Yurok%20Tribal%20Members. 
30 The Yurok Tribe, Catastrophic Juvenile Fish Kill Unfolds in Real Time on the Klamath River: Massive Disease Outbreak 
Puts Klamath Salmon on Path to Extinction (May 13, 2021), 
https://www.yuroktribe.org/post/catastrophic-juvenile-fish-kill-unfolds-in-real-time-on-the-klamath-river 

 
 
Page 6 
 
 
their subsistence and ceremonial needs, let alone their commercial needs.31 Many members 
faced economic hardship as they rely on salmon for their livelihood, either through selling 
fish or sport-fishing tourism.32 As one member notes, a rich salmon harvest “feeds the 
family” and “buy[s] our kids school clothes.”33 Tribal businesses also lost annual income 
from lack of fish supply.34 Economic hardships are magnified even further in a community 
where the average annual income of tribal members on the Yurok Reservation is $11,000 
annually35 which is below the poverty line.36 
 
● Spiritual and Cultural: Traditional Yurok ceremonies rely on the quality of water so that Tribal 
members can properly perform their cultural and spiritual traditions. For example, 
ceremonies such as the Brush Dance, Jump Dance, White Deerskin Dance, and Boat Dance, 
require close proximity to the Klamath River.37 Part of the ceremonial practice includes 
bathing in and drinking the River water, which is directly connected to water quality. As one 
member of the Yurok Tribe recalls, because many of the ceremonies revolve around salmon, 
it helps her connect to her ancestral heritage: “My people have lived on the Klamath for 
thousands of years, and I know that the salmon today are the descendants of those my 
ancestors managed. These salmon are a direct tie to my ancestors—the physical 
representation of their love for me.”38 A threat to the water quality is a direct threat to these 
deep-rooted spiritual and cultural practices.  
 
Despite the difficulty that the Yurok Tribe has faced in fighting to protect the Klamath River 
and the salmon, and while there is still significant work to be done, the Tribe is optimistic that recent 
developments will assist in better outcomes in the near and long term. On November 17, 2022, the 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) issued an order surrendering licenses to the Lower 
Klamath Project and approving the removal of four dams from the Klamath Basin.39 This is the 
largest restoration effort in history, made possible by the joint efforts of the Karuk Tribe, Yurok 
Tribe, California, Oregon, conservation organizations, commercial fishing organizations, and dam 
 
31 Letter from Chairman Joseph L. James to Gina Raimonda, Sec’y of Commerce, Re: Commercial Fishery Disaster 
Declaration for the 2020 Yurok Klamath River Commercial Fishery (Apr. 15, 2021), 
https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/2021-09/21-073899_Yurok%20incoming.pdf 
32Brook Thompson, The Familial Bond Between the Klamath River and the Yurok People: How a Tribal Community’s 
Health is Intimately Connected to the Health of the River, High Country News (Aug. 14, 2021), 
https://www.hcn.org/issues/53.9/indigenous-affairs-klamath-basin-the-familial-bond-between-the-klamath-river-and-the-
yurok-people 
33Lise Morehouse, 'It Takes Our Purpose': With No Salmon, Yurok Tribe Struggles With Identity, NPR (Nov. 29, 2017), 
https://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2017/11/29/561581193/it-takes-our-purpose-with-no-salmon-yurok-tribe-
struggles-with-identity 
34See Sloan supra note 18 at 43.  
35 Yurok Tribe, Written Testimony Regarding H.R> 5548, Fishery Failures: Urgently Needed Disaster Declarations Act 
(Jan. 14, 2020), https://www.congress.gov/116/meeting/house/110359/witnesses/HHRG-116-II13-Wstate-MyersF-
20200114.pdf 
36 Id.  
37 See Sloan supra note 18 at 43.  
38See Thompson supra note 32.  
39 Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Order Modifying and Approving Surrender of License and Removal of Project 
Facilities (Nov. 17, 2022), https://www.opb.org/pdf/Klamath%20Project%20Order_1668750641288.pdf. 

 
 
Page 7 
 
 
owner PacifiCorp. Restoration efforts are slated to begin later this year, opening up hundreds of 
miles of historic salmon habitat and improving water quality, paving the way for the Klamath River 
to recover from the inhospitable conditions it’s faced and for the salmon to come home. 40  
 
In addition, to address impacts of climate change President Biden signed the Inflation 
Reduction Act (IRA), which provides funding specifically for tribal communities to address threats 
posed by climate change.41 And on December 8, 2022, Secretary Haaland of the Department of the 
Interior announced that tribal water projects in the Klamath River Basin will receive $5.8 million “to 
restore aquatic ecosystems, improve the resilience of habitats, and mitigate the effects of the 
ongoing drought crisis.”42 This funding includes a Juvenile Salmonid Survival and Migration Rate 
Study conducted jointly by the Hoopa Valley Tribe, Karuk Tribe and Yurok Tribe, as well as discrete 
funding to the Yurok Tribe to conduct habitat restoration in the Oregon Gulch Project, Mainstem 
Trinity River.43 The Yurok Tribe applauds these efforts.  
 
And in line with these efforts, EPA’s Proposed Rule requiring consideration of tribal reserved 
rights when establishing WQS “is a critical component of reducing the impact of climate change on 
tribes.”44 As additional efforts are made to address climate-related challenges facing tribal 
communities,  EPA needs to continue to consider that many tribes are more vulnerable to the impacts 
of climate change based on their interdependence and connectedness to the environment for their 
livelihood and existence. Tribes have limited flexibility when it comes to accessing new gathering 
places and hunting grounds.45 And the Yurok Tribe should not bear the disproportionate burden of 
the ecological impacts that have occurred outside its control. It is thus imperative to address these 
rapid changes through a close partnership between tribal, federal, and state interests to develop 
creative solutions to address the complexities of this global issue.  
 
B. The EPA has a Trust Responsibility to the Yurok Tribe and its Federally Reserved 
Fishing and Water Rights  
The Yurok Reservation was established on the lower Klamath River so the Tribe could 
maintain its fishing and river-centric way of life, reserving to the Tribe fishing and water rights to 
support that lifestyle and conferring a legal duty on the federal government to protect those rights. 
See Baley v. United States, 942 F.3d 1312, 1335 (Fed. Cir. 2019); Klamath Water Users Protective Ass’n v. 
Patterson, 204 F.3d 1206, 1213 (9th Cir. 1999) (the Bureau and United States act “as a trustee for the 
 
40 The Yurok Tribe, Federal Regulators Green Light Largest River Restoration Project in US History (Nov. 18, 2022), 
https://www.yuroktribe.org/post/federal-regulators-green-light-largest-river-restoration-project-in-us-history. 
41Domestic Policy Council, The White House Tribal Nations Summit Progress Report (2022), 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/2022_11_23-WH-Tribal-Nations-Summit-Progress-
Report-Final.pdf 
42 Press Release, Dep’t of the Interior, During Visit to Klamath River, Secretary Haaland Announces Four Tribal Water 
Projects (Dec. 8, 2022), https://www.doi.gov/pressreleases/during-visit-klamath-river-secretary-haaland-announces-
four-tribal-water-projects. 
43 Id.  
44  Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74,361 (proposed Dec. 
5, 2022) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. Part 131), https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-
0001. 
45 T.M. Bull Bennett et al., Ch. 12: Indigenous Peoples, Lands, and Resources. Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third 
National Climate Assessment, J. M. Melillo, Terese (T.C.) Richmond, and G. W. Yohe, Eds., U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, 297- 317, https://nca2014.globalchange.gov/report/sectors/indigenous-peoples#intro- 

 
 
Page 8 
 
 
Tribes, has a responsibility to protect their rights and resources.”); Parravano v. Babbitt, 70 F.3d 539, 
541 (9th Cir.1995). The Klamath River and its fishery are “not much less necessary to the existence 
of the [Yurok] than the atmosphere they breathe[.]” Blake v. Arnett, 663 F.2d 906, 909 (9th Cir. 1981) 
(quoting United States v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371, 381 (1905)). As elaborated above, through the creation 
of the Yurok Reservation, the Yurok Tribe has federally reserved fishing and water rights that must 
be supported and protected by the United States under its trust responsibility toward the Yurok 
Tribe. 
 
The EPA, as a federal agency, shares the United States’ trust responsibility to the Yurok 
Tribe to ensure its actions and policies protect the Yurok Tribe’s rights and resources. EPA’s 
proposed rule is in furtherance of the trust responsibility and is necessary to protect tribes’ federal 
reserved fishing and water rights, as well as their sovereign interests in protecting these rights.  As 
the EPA correctly observes in its proposed rule, tribes’ reserved rights to use and access the natural 
and cultural resources are a key part of tribal life and “are of deep cultural, economic, and 
subsistence importance to the tribes.”46 The Yurok Tribe therefore supports EPA’s efforts to 
require states to evaluate tribal reserved rights to aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources in an area 
or downstream of an area when states are developing or revising WQS.   
 
Specifically, by providing a multi-layered effort to include tribes’ input and expertise in 
determining when and how state WQS may impact their tribal reserved rights, EPA ensures that 
tribes will have a meaningful and substantial role throughout the process. As EPA explains, 
determining whether waters subject to state WQS impact a tribal reserved right involves an in-depth 
inquiry into several aspects of the right, including the type of right, where it is exercised, and in what 
manner.47 This necessarily requires significant coordination with the impacted tribe. The Yurok 
Tribe supports EPA’s regulatory provisions that require coordination and consultation with 
impacted tribes early and often in this process by requiring that (1) when states assess the scope of 
tribal reserved rights, their assessment must be informed by the right holders themselves and that (2) 
EPA consult with affected rights holders when determining whether states WQS submissions 
adequately protect tribal reserved rights.  
 
The Tribe makes the following suggestions to further strengthen the proposed regulatory 
framework and protections for tribes: 
 
II. 
Proposed Regulations at 40 C.F.R. § 131.6 (g): Minimum Requirements for Water 
Quality Standards Submission 
 
40 C.F.R. § 131.6 (g) should incorporate language to include future uses in alignment with the 
three-year review process required for states under 40 C.F.R. § 131.20 and specify the inclusion of 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge as a type of data that may be used to develop water quality 
standards. The Tribe suggests adding the following language (bold and underlined) to 40 C.F.R. 
§ 131.6 (g):  
Where applicable, information which will aid the agency in evaluating whether the submission protects 
tribal reserved rights consistent with § 131.9, including: 
 
46 Proposed Water Quality Standards, supra note 44. 
47 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,367.  

 
 
Page 9 
 
 
(1) Information about the scope, nature, and past, and current, and three-year forecasted 
use of the tribal reserved rights, as informed by the right holders; and 
(2) Data and methods used to develop the water quality standards, including Traditional 
Ecological Knowledge, if provided by tribes with free and informed consent.  
 
A. Rationale for Including Projected Future Use in WQS Submissions  
EPA proposes requiring that the unsuppressed level of a resource should “account for 
situations where restoration efforts are planned or underway (e.g., efforts to improve habitat or reduce 
contamination), such that it would be reasonable to expect the opportunities for use of the resource 
to increase in the future.”48 Although this language does not address the requisite time frame for a 
restoration effort to be considered in determining unsuppressed use levels, the Tribe interprets this 
provision to include longer-term restoration projects such as the Klamath dam removals. As noted 
above, in November 2022, the FERC approved the surrender of the Lower Klamath Project license 
and the removal of the four project developments on the river, which will be the largest dam removal 
and river restoration project in the world when it occurs.49 Removal of the four dams is planned to 
take place between summer 2023 and the end of 2024.50 The Tribe believes the Proposed Rule should 
account for the removal of the dams as a “restoration effort” in determining “unsuppressed use” of 
the Klamath, as it would be “reasonable to expect the opportunities for use” of the river to increase 
in the future after the dams are removed. To ensure the final rule is interpreted consistent with this 
belief, the Tribe requests that EPA clarify the requisite timeframe for a restoration project to trigger 
the requirement that the unsuppressed use of the water body be considered in setting water quality 
standards. 
 
It follows that if setting the unsuppressed level of a resource incorporates planned restoration 
efforts, states should submit information regarding forecasted use of tribal reserved rights as informed 
by tribes to ensure water quality standards accurately represent the unsuppressed level. 
 
B. Rationale for Including Traditional Ecological Knowledge in WQS 
Submissions 
 
40 C.F.R. § 131.6(g)(2) provides that states must submit data and methods used to develop 
water quality standards for EPA to ensure tribal reserved rights have been adequately taken into 
account in the development of the water quality standards. The Tribe recommends specifically 
including that Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK)51 if provided with free and informed 
 
48 Water Quality Standards, supra note 47. 
49 Associated Press, The largest dam demolition in history is approved for a Western river, NPR (Nov. 17, 2022), 
https://perma.cc/FUC7-FSKK.  
50 Malik Patterson, Klamath River dams to be removed by the end of 2024, KTVL (Nov. 19, 2022), 
https://perma.cc/Q5XP-7PXH. 
51 While there are many forms and definitions of Traditional Ecological Knowledge (“TEK”) and the term should be 
individually defined by impacted rights holders/tribes themselves based on their unique and specific beliefs and 
practices, the White House issued a memorandum in November 2021 recognizing Indigenous TEK as form of 
knowledge that contributes to scientific, technical, social, and economic advances. White House Office of Science and 
Technology Policy (OSTP) and White House Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ), Memorandum for the Heads of 
Federal Departments and Agencies: Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Federal Decision Making (Nov. 
15, 2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/111521-OSTP-CEQ-ITEK-Memo.pdf.  In 
follow up guidance issued by the White House OSTP and CEQ, it recognized Indigenous Knowledge as broadly 
speaking, “a body of observations, oral and written knowledge, innovations, practices, and beliefs developed by Tribes 

 
 
Page 10 
 
 
consent,52 should be a type of data that states provide. EPA’s Policy on Environmental Justice for 
Working with Federally Recognized Tribes and Indigenous Peoples provides that the principle of 
encouraging the integration of TEK into the Agency’s environmental science, policy, and decision-
making processes applies to EPA’s direct implementation of its programs. Certainly, this principle 
applies to EPA’s review of state water quality standards and assessment of whether they meet EPA’s 
minimum requirements. However, if states are not required, or at least encouraged to include TEK in 
the data submitted, then there is a high-risk states will opt not to include TEK. And if states do not 
include TEK in their submissions, EPA cannot integrate TEK into its review and assessment. 
Including the suggested language will ensure EPA is best positioned to integrate TEK into its review 
of state water quality standards and thereby better fulfill its commitment to providing tribes fair 
treatment and meaningful involvement in decisions affecting tribal members’ health and environment. 
 
III.  Proposed Regulations at 40 C.F.R. § 131.9: Establishment of Water Quality Standards 
Factors  
40 C.F.R. § 131.9 should incorporate principles of shared decision-making and intent on behalf 
of the EPA to seek funding to ensure substantial participation from right holders during tribal 
consultation. Federally recognized tribes, like the Yurok Tribe, have a nation-to-nation relationship 
with the federal government as sovereign governments that pre-date and are recognized under the 
United States Constitution. To strengthen those relationships, the federal government has committed 
to engaging in “regular and meaningful consultation and collaboration with tribal officials.”53Although 
the Proposed Regulations will require EPA to initiate tribal consultation with the right holders when 
reviewing WQS submissions to determine whether state WQS protect applicable reserved rights, it 
does not invite those tribal reserved right holders to contribute to or collaborate on WQS to protect 
those rights.54 The Proposed Regulations should enhance tribal sovereignty while also minimizing 
adverse impacts on tribal self-governance by allowing tribes, should they elect, as part of the tribal 
consultation process to submit plans and draft WQS for consideration to protect  resources to which 
they possess tribal reserved rights.  
 
The Tribe suggests adding the following language to 40 C.F.R. § 131.9 (b): “In reviewing State 
water quality standards submissions under this section, EPA will initiate tribal consultation with the 
right holders, consistent with applicable EPA tribal consultation policies” The EPA will consult 
with, and seek the participation of, the affected Indian tribes to the maximum extent 
practicable, including by providing affected tribes adequate opportunities to participate in 
data collection, consensus seeking, and associated processes. The EPA will seek to provide 
funding for any such tribal consultation. 
 
and Indigenous Peoples through interaction and experience with the environment.” White House OSTP and White 
House CEQ, Memorandum for the Heads of Federal Departments and Agencies: Guidance for Federal Departments 
and Agencies on Indigenous Knowledge (Nov. 30, 2022), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2022/12/OSTP-CEQ-IK-Guidance.pdf. The guidance is “intended to promote and enable a 
Government-wide effort to improve the recognition and inclusion of Indigenous Knowledge.” Id. at 3. 
52 Confidentiality requirements for information regarding tribal cultural resources tribal consultation should also be 
developed or covered prior to the release of data to the EPA. 
53 Exec. Order No. 13175, Consultation and Coordination With Indian Tribal Governments, 65 Fed. Reg. 67,249 (Nov. 
6, 2000). See also Presidential Memorandum on Tribal Consultation and Strengthening Nation-to-Nation Relationships, 
86 Fed. Reg. 7491 (Jan. 29, 2021) (reaffirming the policies announced in Exec. Order 13175). 
54 Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, Environmental Protection. 
Agency (Nov. 2022), https://perma.cc/WA3P-H8B6. 

 
 
Page 11 
 
 
 
 This added language is, in part, borrowed from Joint Secretarial Order 3206 on American 
Indian Tribal Rights, Federal-Tribal Trust Responsibilities, and the Endangered Species Act 
(“Order”).55 The Order attempts to clarify the federal-tribal relationship under the ESA. Both tribal 
and federal government officials supported the Order’s impact on the shared responsibility of 
developing plans for the management of endangered species in Indian country, enhancing tribal 
sovereignty, and improving the government-to-government relationship.56 To that end, the Order 
directed agencies to “consult with, and seek the participation of, the affected Indian tribes to the 
maximum extent practicable . . . includ[ing by] providing affected tribes adequate opportunities to 
participate in data collection, consensus seeking, and associated processes.”57 Tribal government 
officials noted that effective communication with government agencies was crucial to the effective 
development of any such plans, and praised the requirement for increased communications of federal 
agencies on programs that may impact tribal resources after the Order.58  
 
Including similar language within the definition of tribal consultation in EPA’s Proposed Rule 
would enhance tribal partnerships in determining any requisite WQS protect tribal reserved rights. 
The Proposed Regulations would require states to include “documentation of the state’s efforts to 
obtain information about the existence of any applicable tribal reserved rights, their current and past 
use, scope, and nature, as well as the level of water quality that protects those rights.”59 Inviting tribes 
to participate in data collection, consensus seeking, and associated processes regarding the extent of 
their reserved rights would thus help to ensure meaningful collaboration and involvement.  
 
One final area of consensus among those interviewed regarding Joint Secretarial Order 3206 
was that funding was inadequate for the effective administration of the programs at issue.60 Funding 
for staffing, equipment, and land management was scarce and limited many tribes’ ability to participate 
in the process of formulating resource plans.61 For example, lack of funding led the Rosebud Sioux 
Tribe in South Dakota to discontinue environmental programs.62 Here, EPA’s Proposed Rule does 
not specify whether funding will be available to enhance tribal participation in consultation and WQS 
formation. Meaningful tribal participation in this process may require additional funding for tribes 
whose reserved rights are implicated by the proposed regulations.   
 
A. Unsuppressed Level Should Specifically Include Consideration of Other Federal 
Statutes such as the Endangered Species Act 
EPA’s proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(1) would require that State WQS protect unsuppressed 
use of any resources to which tribal reserved rights apply.63 In determining the “unsuppressed level” 
 
55 Joint Secretarial Order No. 3206, American Indian Tribal Rights, Federal-Tribe Trust Responsibilities, and the 
Endangered Species Act (June 5, 1997), https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/elips/documents/3206-
american_indian_tribal_rights_federal-tribal_trust_responsibilities_and_the_endangered_species_act.pdf. 
56 Drew Kraniak, Conserving Endangered Species in Indian Country: The Success and Struggles of Joint Secretarial Order 3206 Nineteen 
Years On, 26 Colo. Nat. Resources, Energy & Envtl. L. Rev. 322 (Feb. 2015), https://perma.cc/YE7H-F7CJ. 
57 Joint Secretarial Order No. 3206, supra note 55. 
58 Kraniak, supra note 56. 
59 Proposed Water Quality Standards, supra note 54. 
60 Kraniak, supra note 56. 
61 Id. 
62 Id. 
63 87 Fed. Reg. 74,361. 

 
 
Page 12 
 
 
of a water body, the Rule requires balancing of “heritage use of a resource with what is currently 
reasonably achievable for a particular waterbody.”64 EPA has requested comment on “whether 
additional language should be included in the final rule specifying the considerations for determining 
unsuppressed WQS.”65 In determining what is reasonable to achieve for the waterbody, EPA should 
specify that compliance with other federal statutes, including the Endangered Species Act (ESA), is 
an important component of “reasonableness.” This may come into play when the ESA requires 
designation of part of a water body as critical habitat for an endangered or threatened species, thus 
restricting activities on the water body.66 Any cooperative agreements between Federal and State 
agencies that establish a program for the conservation of endangered and threatened species should 
also provide the state with valuable information regarding what is “reasonable to achieve” for a body 
of water.67  
 
For example, the District Court for the Northern District of California ruled on February 6th 
of this year that an order by the Oregon Water Resources Department blocking water releases from 
the Upper Klamath Lake impermissibly threatened downstream Coho Salmon and Southern Resident 
killer whale populations under the ESA.68  In determining unsuppressed use of any aquatic or aquatic-
dependent resources on the Klamath River to which tribal reserved rights apply, what is “reasonable 
to achieve” must include the planned water releases as well as any other future obligations imposed 
by the ESA to protect endangered or threatened species in the river. If the ESA compels a certain 
action to be taken on a water body, this action, and its attendant effects on water quality, should be 
considered per se reasonable to achieve for that body of water. 
 
B. Additional Guidance Should be Provided on Evaluating Evidence in Determining 
Unsuppressed Levels of the Exercise of Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
EPA lists several types of evidence when considering water quality necessary to protect 
aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources or users of the resources, including consideration of “fish 
consumption rate surveys, studies or accounts of heritage fish consumption rates, peer-reviewed 
articles or reports on the types and levels of pollutants that can adversely affect the resource in 
question, and monitoring data reflecting historic and/or current water quality.”69 The Yurok Tribe 
generally supports using available data and information as outlined in the proposed regulations to 
consider the water quality necessary to support meaningful exercise of tribal reserved rights, subject 
to the amendments outlined above. However, another important consideration to emphasize is the 
need to consider indigenous knowledge and tribal input at every stage in the process; not only 
should states consult with tribes when compiling data on the nature and scope of the impacted 
rights, but also when that data is being assessed, evaluated, and used to set protective WQS. Thus, in 
addition to amending proposed provision 40 C.F.R. § 131.6 (g) to require consideration of TEK 
when made available by tribes as outlined above, EPA should consider releasing robust guidance on 
what data sources are relevant to this inquiry and how these sources of information should be 
balanced and weighed to determine the appropriate action to take. 
 
64 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,369. 
65 Id. 
66 See 16 U.S.C. § 1532.  
67 See id. at § 1535. 
68 Yurok Tribe et al. v. U.S. Bureau of Reclamation et al., No. 19-cv-04405-WHO, 2023 WL 1785278 (N.D. Cal. Feb 6, 2023); 
See also Baley, 942 F.3d at 1335. 
69 87 Fed. Reg 74,368. 

 
 
Page 13 
 
 
 
In declining to set a national applicable threshold for unsuppressed levels or use of a 
resource, EPA cites to the National Environmental Justice Advisory Committee (NEJAC)'s 2002 
report, which notes that suppression effects may occur in two circumstances: (1) when a waterbody 
and the resources it supports become contaminated such that individuals refrain from consuming 
fish caught from the body of water, and (2) when fish populations are depleted from their historic 
quantities and species varieties such that individuals cannot catch or consume as many fish as “they 
had or would.”70 However, the NEJAC report also notes the “downward spiral” that may ensue if 
environmental standards permit further and further contamination or depletion of fish.71 For 
example, if WQS are set based “on a picture of exposure” that assumes current fish consumption 
rates of an impacted community will remain stable, when that rate includes suppression resulting 
from water quality or resource availability, agencies will “permit relatively greater quantities of 
pollutants to remain in or be discharged to the waters and sediments.”72 Thus, NEJAC recommends 
that EPA identify appropriate “baselines” reflecting higher levels of consumption to be employed 
when setting and approving WQS, taking into account historic, cultural, and aspirational interests of 
the impacted communities.73 
 
Given these concerns, the Yurok Tribe supports proposed 40 C.F.R. 131.9(a)(1), which 
requires that state and federal WQS protect tribal reserved rights at an unsuppressed level. As EPA 
aptly raises,74 for many, including the Yurok Tribe, in determining unsuppressed levels, what is 
reasonably achievable will not be the current fish consumption rate. Because “the snapshot of 
contemporary consumption practices provided by recent surveys arguably represents a nadir—a low 
point from which tribes are working to recover as environments are restored and traditional 
practices reinvigorated.”75 As such the Tribe emphasizes the point that EPA raises—that it is 
imperative that when states and EPA are determining an unsuppressed level, that they not only 
consider the legally protected nature of the tribal reserved right, but also past and future uses of the 
rights, including restoration efforts that are underway such as habitat restoration and mitigation 
efforts.  
 
While the Tribe supports the inclusion of historic data, of equal or even greater importance 
in some aquatic ecosystems are models of future projected water quality and ecosystem functioning 
following restoration efforts. For example, with the impending removal of dams on the Klamath 
River, historic habitat areas for salmon and other aquatic species for which historic data may not 
exist will become available for repopulation. For such areas, the only potentially relevant data may be 
from models projecting how dam removal will affect their hydrology and ecology. Thus, it is 
imperative that states and EPA utilize such data in determining whether water quality standards set 
 
70 Nat’l Env’t Just. Advisory Council, Fish Consumption and Environmental Justice, p.44, 46 (2002), https:/ 
lwww.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-02/documents/fish-consump-report _ 1102.pdf. 
71 Id. at 44. 
72 Id. at 46; see also id. at 43-49.  
73 Id. at 49. 
74 Id. 
75 Catherine A. O'Neill, Fishable Waters, 1 Am. Indian L.J. 181, 217 (2013), 
https://digitalcommons.law.seattleu.edu/faculty/306; see also id. at 216 (“Indeed, the forces of suppression, often 
perpetrated or permitted by federal and state governments, have included inundation of fishing places; depletion and 
contamination of the fishery resource; and years of prosecution, intimidation, and gear confiscation.”), 

 
 
Page 14 
 
 
for these areas will be sufficient. This is vastly preferable to utilizing only historic data, or worse, 
where no historic data exists, no data to determine the necessary water quality standards in these 
areas. Not using model outputs risks setting inadequate water quality standards that fail to protect 
reserved rights once restoration efforts are underway and such habitat areas are modified. Further, 
to the extent that certain data is unavailable, it is all the more important for EPA to provide funding 
and technical assistance to tribes to commission studies, modeling, and data analysis relevant to 
determining unsuppressed levels. It is imperative that both state and federal agencies establish a 
framework enabling direct payment to tribes for services rendered. Presently, there has been 
resistance towards compensating the Yurok Tribe directly for their contributions in providing 
services that benefit the general public. It is crucial that a mechanism be established to facilitate this 
process. 
 
When unsuppressed levels are determined, Yurok encourages EPA to ensure more 
protective WQS are established, taking into account historic, cultural, and aspirational interests of 
the tribes to avoid further depletion and contamination of tribal resources. Yurok hopes close 
consultation between tribes, EPA, and states as this regulatory framework is implemented and as 
states begin the process of reviewing their WQS for compliance with the proposed regulation will 
help achieve this outcome. Consultation is key to ensure the rights of tribal communities are 
protected.  
 
C. In Furtherance of Protecting Tribal Subsistence Fishing, EPA Should Set a Mandatory 
Risk of Cancer Rate of at least 10-6 
Proposed 40 CFR 131.9(a)(2), requires that the “health of the right holders to at least the 
same risk level as provided to the general population of the State.”76 EPA explains that it anticipates 
this provision would mean that the appropriate cancer risk level for the general population, of “at 
least 10−5 along with a fish consumption rate that reflects the reserved right,” would apply when 
determining human health criteria.77 The Yurok Tribe respectfully suggests that such a proposed 
acceptable risk level is not sufficiently stringent.  The Tribe agrees with EPA’s determination that 
tribes exercising their rights should not be considered “highly exposed” subgroups based on their 
increased rates of fish consumption, which would mean a higher acceptable risk of cancer level of 
10-4  under EPA’s 2000 methodology.78 However, as proposed by EPA, states are left with the option 
of setting an acceptable risk of cancer level of either 10-5 (or one in 100,000) or 10-6 (one in one 
million) for tribes exercising their rights. EPA should instead mandate a higher protection for tribal 
populations by requiring that states use at least a 10-6 risk level when setting WQS in bodies of water 
that impact tribal reserved rights, either directly or because the tribal reserved rights are located 
downstream.  
 
EPA calculates ambient water quality criteria at a 10-6 (one in one million) cancer risk level 
for the general population, which the agency views as “appropriate for the general population.”79 
And while EPA may accept higher levels of risk (10-5), EPA should impose standards that would 
 
76 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378.   
77 Id. at 74,369.  
78 EPA, Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human Health 2-6 (2000) 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2018-10/documents/methodology-wqc-protection-hh-2000.pdf. 
79 Id. at 1-8. 

Page 15 
protect tribal members who exercise tribal reserved rights, and in particular those who exercise 
subsistence living, to the highest extent possible.  This would be in line with EPA’s long held view 
that fish consumers at higher risk of exposure to certain carcinogens may warrant increased 
protection.80 As such, the Tribe suggests adding the following language to 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(2): 
§ 131.9 Protection of tribal reserved rights.
(a) Water quality standards must protect tribal reserved rights applicable to waters
subject to such standards. To protect tribal reserved rights, water quality standards
must, to the extent supported by available data and information, be established to
protect:
…
(2) The health of the right holders to at least the same risk level as provided to the
general population of the State, provided that the cancer risk level used in deriving
human health water quality criteria for carcinogens where there are applicable
tribal reserved rights is not greater than 10-6 (one in one million).
*** 
The Yurok Tribe appreciates the opportunity to comment on the proposed rule to review 
WQS regulations at 40 C.F.R Part 131, to require state and federal WQS to protect tribal reserved 
rights to aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources. With the recommendations included above, this 
proposal is consistent with the Biden-Harris Administration's commitment to tribal communities in 
addressing continuing threats to human health and the environment. We look forward to engaging 
with the EPA for further consultation. Please contact Melodie Meyer (mmeyer@yuroktribe.nsn.us) 
and Alexander Mesher (amesher@yuroktribe.nsn.us) with any questions about the points raised in 
this letter. 
Wok-hlew’,  
Joseph L. James 
Yurok Tribe Chairman 
80 Water Quality Standards; Establishment of Numeric Criteria for Priority Toxic Pollutants; States’ Compliance, 57 Fed. 
Reg. 60848, 60849 (Dec. 22, 1992) (recognizing that “carcinogens that bioaccumulate, particularly given the exposure of 
fishermen to such carcinogens, may justify a more protective risk level of 10-6 for the average fish consumer”).

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0261 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
1 
 
Janet Alkire 
  
Submitted via https://www.regulations.gov 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 6, 2023 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington D.C. 20460 
 
RE: 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 - Comments on Water Quality Standards  
 
 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights  
 
To the EPA: 
 
I serve as Chairwoman of the Standing Rock Sioux Tribe.  We are concerned with the potential consequences of 
the Proposed Rule on Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved rights. (87 Fed. 
Reg. 74361, December 5, 2022).  This letter represents our comments on the proposed rule. 
 
Our Tribe possesses reserved rights to all waters of the Standing Rock Reservation.  Some of our water basins, 
such as the Oak Creek and Porcupine Creek, are wholly within the Standing Rock Reservation boundaries and 
are not subject to state water quality standards in any segment of the river systems.  Many of our waters are 
boundary waters or flow through the Reservation, such as the Missouri River, Cannon Ball River and Grand 
River, and they are impacted by state standards.  Consequently, the proposed rule affects Standing Rock. 
 
Standing Rock has long fought to defend the rights reserved under our Treaties.  With respect to the proposed 
rule, the reserved rights that are impacted include reserved water rights, reserved gathering rights for traditional 
foods and medicine plants, and reserved subsistence hunting and fishing rights.  These are important rights that 
we continue to exercise today, as part of our culture.   
 
I do not support authorizing the states to identify or evaluate Tribal reserved rights as part of the tri-annual review 
of state water quality standards.  The states have no authority or expertise in this area.    Standing Rock’s 
     TRIBAL COUNCIL 
     (AT LARGE) 
          Chairwoman 
 
                     John Pretty Bear 
                      Cannonball District 
 
 
                  Sid Bailey, Jr.  
                    Long Soldier District 
 
     Nola Taken Alive 
 
 
        Frank Jamerson                                                                                    Susan Agard 
 
     Charles Walker 
                      Jeff Cadotte, Sr. 
                      Wakpala District 
   
          Vice Chairman                                                                                           Secretary 
 
     Avis Little Eagle 
 
            Delray Demery 
                                  Kenel District 
 
 
 
     Kory McLaughlin 
                           Joe White Mountain 
Jr. 
                            Bear Soldier District 
 
 
 
     Warren Hawk 
                       Paul Archambault 
                             Rock Creek District 
 
                           Truth ╬ Compassion 
 
     Jesse McLaughlin 
                        Jessica R. Porras  
                   Running Antelope District 
 
      Remember Who We Are 
 
                        Wilberta Red 
Tomahawk 
                    Porcupine District 

2 
 
neighboring states have opposed the exercise of our reserved rights, especially our reserved right to hunt and fish, 
and to regulate our water, at every juncture.  For this reason, the authority conferred upon the states under the 
proposed rule is inappropriate.   
 
Standing Rock is a signatory to the 1851 and 1868 Fort Laramie Treaties.  Our Treaties are with the United States 
- not the states.  The states should have no say about these rights.   
 
In the preamble, EPA opines that consultation with our Tribe will protect our reserved rights from infringement 
by the states.  However, Standing Rock’s experience with EPA’s level of Nation-to-Nation consultation has been 
negative.  From 2020-2022, we attempted to consult with EPA on the Clean Water Act section 402 discharge 
permit into the Oak Creek for a regulated entity on our Reservation.  We requested inclusion of a permit term for 
compliance with the Standing Rock Water Code.  EPA initially agreed, but the regulated entity filed an appeal 
with the Environmental Appeals Board.  Upon receiving the appeal, EPA reversed course, and deleted the term, 
thereby undermining Tribal sovereignty and allowing a regulated entity to impact the waters of the Reservation 
in violation of Tribal law.  Significantly, the habitat for traditional foods is impacted, yet EPA opposed our 
reserved right to gather these fruits.   
 
Thus, the EPA ignored our Tribal ecological knowledge and practices along the Oak Creek, which is wholly 
within Reservation boundaries.  We cannot trust EPA to support our sovereignty and traditional practices on 
border waters and river systems that cross Reservation boundaries,  when it refuses to do so for waters wholly 
within our Reservation and our jurisdiction.   
 
EPA should enhance its consultation protocols with Tribes, rather than promulgate a regulation that will codify a 
state role in identifying and evaluating Tribal reserved rights in water basins subject to state water quality 
standards.  This would enable EPA to learn more about our Treaty-protected reserved rights, and to protect them 
at the federal level in the approval process for state standards.  The states should not be provided authority to 
identify or evaluate our rights in the water quality standards process.  
 
For these reasons, I oppose the proposed rule, and request that EPA take no further action.  Thank you for 
consideration of these comments. 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Janet Alike, Chairwoman 
Standing Rock Sioux Tribe

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0281 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
 
Michael Regan, Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, D.C.  20460 
 
Re:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-0W-2021-0791 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
The Voigt Intertribal Task Force of the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission (“GLIFWC” or 
“Commission”) submits the following comments on the Proposed Clean Water Act Section 401 water 
quality standards revisions (“Proposed Rule”).   
 
The Commission is a natural resource agency 
exercising delegated authority from eleven federally 
recognized Indian tribes in Michigan, Minnesota, and 
Wisconsin1.  These tribes retain reserved hunting, 
fishing, and gathering rights in territories ceded to the 
United States in various treaties (“ceded territories”), 
rights that have been reaffirmed by federal courts, 
including the U.S. Supreme Court.  The ceded 
territories extend over portions of Minnesota, 
Wisconsin, and Michigan, and include portions of 
Lakes Superior, Michigan, and Huron.  The Voigt 
Intertribal Task Force (“Voigt Task Force” or “Task 
Force”) is a constituent committee of the Commission 
that provides, among other things, policy guidance 
with respect to issues affecting the inland portions of 
 
1 GLIFWC member tribes are: in Wisconsin – the Bad River Band of the Lake Superior Tribe of 
Chippewa Indians, Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians, Lac Courte Oreilles Band of 
Lake Superior Chippewa Indians, St. Croix Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin, Sokaogon Chippewa 
Community of the Mole Lake Band, and Red Cliff Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians; in Minnesota 
– Fond du Lac Chippewa Tribe, and Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians; and in Michigan – Bay Mills 
Indian Community, Keweenaw Bay Indian Community, and Lac Vieux Desert Band of Lake Superior 
Chippewa Indians. 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 2 
 
the 1837 and 1842 ceded territories. The Task Force is made up of ten of GLIFWC’s member tribes, 
however these proposed revisions directly affect the interests of all GLIFWC member tribes.2 
 
As an initial matter, the Task Force notes that the Proposed Rule discusses at length, the process for 
determining if, where, and to what resources tribal reserved rights apply, and EPA has stated that this 
can be a complex undertaking. For GLIFWC’s member tribes, the undertaking should be simple. These 
tribes have well understood, broadly applicable treaty rights that extend throughout their ceded 
territories and that have been the subject of numerous state and federal court cases, including a 
decision of the US Supreme Court.3  The courts have recognized the breadth of resources used by the 
tribes at treaty time, stating, “[a]s of 1837 and 1842, the Chippewa exploited virtually every resource in 
the ceded territory.”4  The list of resources that follows extends for more than a page. 
 
GLIFWC’s delegated authority is exercised within these ceded territories and its focus is the exercise 
of off-reservation treaty rights and the health of the resources underlying those rights.  It is from that 
perspective that these comments are submitted, and these comments should not be construed as 
precluding comments by individual member tribes from their own sovereign and on-reservation 
perspectives.  In addition, the Task Force reminds EPA that although tribes and intertribal agencies 
submit comments during this public comment period, they must not be treated as other public 
commenters, but as the sovereign governments that they are. GLIFWC staff are acutely aware of the 
impacts of Clean Water Act implementation on the authority of its member tribes on both on- and off-
reservation water resources, and strongly support tribal sovereignty and the authority of tribes to 
protect those water resources. 
 
GLIFWC member tribes reserved their hunting, fishing, and gathering rights within the ceded 
territories to guarantee that they could continue their traditional way of life (or “lifeway”) in a manner 
that meets their subsistence, economic, cultural, medicinal, and spiritual needs.  The full exercise of this 
lifeway requires access to clean, healthy, and abundant natural resources, which in turn require clean 
 
2 The Bay Mills Indian Community holds treaty rights in the 1836 ceded territory. Its treaty rights 
were affirmed in United States v. Michigan, 471 F. Supp. 192 (W.D. Mich. 1979). 
3 Error! Main Document Only.See, Treaty of 1836, 7 Stat. 491, Treaty of 1837, 7 Stat. 536; and 
Treaty of 1842, 7 Stat. 591; Lac Courte Oreilles v. Voigt (LCO I), 700 F. 2d 341 (7th Cir. 1983), cert. denied 
464 U.S. 805 (1983); Lac Courte Oreilles v. State of Wisconsin (LCO III), 653 F. Supp. 1420 (W.D. Wis. 
1987); Lac Courte Oreilles v. State of Wisconsin (LCO IV), 668 F. Supp. 1233 (W.D. Wis. 1987); Lac Courte 
Oreilles v. State of Wisconsin (LCO V), 686 F. Supp. 226 (W.D. Wis. 1988); Lac Courte Oreilles v. State of 
Wisconsin (LCO VI), 707 F. Supp. 1034 (W.D. Wis. 1989); Lac Courte Oreilles v. State of Wisconsin (LCO 
VII), 740 F. Supp 1400 (W.D. Wis. 1990); Lac Courte Oreilles v. State of Wisconsin (LCO VIII),  749 F. Supp. 
913 (W.D. Wis. 1990); Lac Courte Oreilles v. State of Wisconsin (LCO IX), 758 F. Supp. 1262 (W.D. Wis. 
1991); Lac Courte Oreilles v. State of Wisconsin (LCO X), 775 F. Supp. 321 (W.D. Wis. 1991); Mille Lacs 
Band v. State of Minnesota, 861 F. Supp. 784 (D. Minn. 1994); Mille Lacs Band v. State of Minnesota, 952 
F. Supp. 1362 (D. Minn. 1997); Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians v. State of Minnesota, 124 F.3d 904, 
(8th Cir. (Minn.) August 26, 1997); Minnesota v. Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians, 119 S.Ct. 1187 
(1999). 
4 Lac Courte Oreilles v. State of Wisconsin (LCO III), 653 F. Supp. 1420, 1426-8 (W.D. Wis. 1987). 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 3 
 
water to thrive.  The federal government’s obligations as a treaty signatory, therefore, require it to 
provide water resources with the greatest protection possible.  To do less would undermine the 
fulfillment of U.S. treaty guarantees. 
 
GLIFWC’s member tribes understand that clean water is fundamental to life.  They regard it as “the 
first medicine,” and as the blood of their mother, the earth.  With this perspective in mind, it would be 
difficult to overstate the importance of water to the spiritual, cultural, medicinal, and subsistence 
practices that underlie the tribal lifeway.  GLIFWC’s member tribes also believe that actions affecting 
natural resources must be judged on how they will impact the health and sustainability of those 
resources seven generations hence.  They seek to ensure that principles of ecosystem management and 
biological diversity recognize and protect the fundamental interdependence of all parts of the 
environment. 
 
Because of the deep importance of water and its vital role in supporting resources located within 
the treaty ceded territories, the Voigt Intertribal Task Force welcomes actions by the EPA to require that 
water quality standards consider the health of treaty resources and the health of rights holders.  The 
Task Force supports the concepts and ideas outlined in the Proposed Rule, but believes the Proposed 
Rule could be strengthened to more completely fulfill the responsibilities of the federal government 
towards tribes and their reserved treaty rights. 
 
I. 
Water as a Sacred Being 
 
Indigenous peoples are the original caretakers of their lands and waters, and Indigenous worldviews 
on the sacredness of water are shared across many, if not all, Indigenous communities.  While specific 
goals and challenges within individual tribal nations can vary, Indigenous communities generally are 
committed to the stewardship and protection of the quality and health of waters, ecosystems, and the 
non-human beings within them.  Traditional worldviews understand that Earth is an interconnected 
system in which the health of any part affects the health and well-being of the whole.  The Tribal and 
First Nations Great Lakes Water Accord, signed on November 23, 2004, illustrates this well.  In part, the 
Tribal and First Nations Great Lakes Water Accord states that “[t]raditional teachings and modern 
science combine to strengthen our historical understanding that Water is the life-blood of our Mother 
Earth. […] We understand that the whole earth is an interconnected ecosystem.  The health of any one 
part affects the health and well-being of the whole.  It is our spiritual and cultural responsibility to 
protect our local lands and Waters in order to help protect the whole of Mother Earth.”5 
 
Ojibwe-Anishinaabe teachings provide a good framework to demonstrate how adverse impacts on 
water can impact the cultural, ceremonial, and overall well-being of plants, wildlife, and people.  In 
Ojibwe-Anishinaabe teachings, there are four orders of creation.  They are the order in which the beings 
on Mother Earth were created: (1) elements, including fire, water, earth, and air; (2) plants; (3) non-
human animals; and (4) people. According to traditional teachings, each of the orders can exist and 
survive without those that come after it, but cannot exist without those that come before it.  In this way, 
water is an elder sibling and teacher to people.  People depend on water both directly and indirectly, 
 
5 https://www.nofnec.ca/PDF/2012/Tribal-and-First-Nations-Great-Lakes-Water-Accord.pdf. 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 4 
 
and plants and non-human animals rely on it as well.  As a creation of the first order, water is a relative 
that has generations of memory and knowledge to teach.  Water is a sacred element, and water-
dwelling and water dependent plants and animals are particularly sacred and greatly influenced 
historical lifeways, tying many tribal communities to their historic homelands. 
 
While the teachings of each tribe and tribal community are unique, most teach that the relationship 
between the orders of creation requires reciprocity and respect.  The relationship, and respectful 
reciprocity, between humans and their non-human teachers ensures an equitable, long-term, 
sustainable, and generational existence for human and non-human communities.  These relationships 
have passed down knowledge of place through thousands of years, and provide a framework and 
roadmap to a sustainable way of life, with respect and understanding for all aspects of creation.  Plants, 
animals, and other spirits are relatives and original teachers – humans have always been the younger 
siblings and students.  For these teachers to continue teaching, humans must continue to acknowledge 
and value their wisdom.  “When their wisdom is not valued, our teachers and relatives quickly become 
‘resources’ that are stripped of their true identities and sold on the open market to the highest bidder.”6 
 
These teachings must be taken seriously in the development of a final framework for drafting new or 
revising existing WQS.  For example, many tribes will not want to quantify their tribal-reserved resources 
and, as such, EPA must make it clear that it recognizes the integrated and interdependent nature of the 
ecosystems on which tribal reserved rights rely, as well as how the health of those ecosystems are 
intricately interwoven with the health and sustainability of traditional tribal lifeways.  EPA must work to 
fulfill its trust responsibility by supporting the health of ecosystems within this final rule. 
 
II. 
Background Considerations 
 
As the EPA is aware, the federal government holds a unique, government-to-government 
relationship with federally recognized tribes. In addition, and with respect to GLIFWC’s member tribes, it 
also assumed particular treaty obligations when it signed the treaties through which GLIFWC’s tribes 
reserved the right to continue their lifeway. Thus, the federal relationship includes both particular treaty 
obligations and the federal trust responsibility – a legal obligation towards tribes that has been 
recognized since Cherokee v. Georgia in 1831.7  The legal obligations are especially potent in cases 
where rights have been explicitly reserved by treaties with Indian tribes – as is they are in the treaties 
through which GLIFWC member tribes ceded land to the federal government, and in which they 
reserved their rights to hunt, fish, and gather on those lands.8  The U.S. Supreme Court has defined 
 
6 Tribal Adaptation Menu Team.  2019 Dibaginjigaadeg Anishinaabe Ezhitwaad: A Tribal Climate 
Adaptation Menu, at 9.   
7 30 U.S. 1 (1831). 
8 Specifically, the Treaty of 1836, 7 Stat. 491; Treaty of 1837, 7 Stat. 536; Treaty of 1842, 7 Stat. 591; 
and Treaty of 1854, 10 Stat. 1109.  The rights guaranteed by these treaties have been affirmed by 
various court decisions, including a 1999 US Supreme Court case. 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 5 
 
treaties as “the supreme law of the land,”9 which only adds weight to the federal government’s 
responsibility towards tribes and their treaty resources. 
 
The Proposed Rule properly recognizes the strength of federal treaties, and also properly recognizes 
that the health and sustainability of treaty resources are susceptible to impaired water quality, including 
in water bodies outside reservation boundaries.  Impaired water quality would negatively impact, or 
suppress, the ability of rights holders from exercising their tribal reserved rights, rendering them 
effectively nonexistent.10   
 
However, with this recognition, the EPA must recognize that the federal government’s treaty 
obligations and trust responsibility cannot be delegated to any other entity, including states – even 
when states assume responsibilities under a federal program.  The Proposed Rule, as written, implies 
that states will make several determinations regarding tribal reserved rights.  These include making 
determinations about whether rights exist, and the geographic extent of those rights.  This is an 
especially egregious and impermissible delegation of federal responsibility because a substantial 
amount of information regarding treaty rights could come from Indigenous Knowledge (otherwise, 
“Traditional Ecological Knowledge” or “TEK”), and the Proposed Rule is silent regarding the weight that 
should be given to Indigenous Knowledge.  In other words, it is possible that states would determine 
that information provided through Indigenous Knowledge, usually in the form of stories, would be of 
less value than that provided through western scientific data – a medium most are more familiar and 
therefore comfortable with.  The inherent risk is that states will make determinations regarding tribal 
reserved rights that exceed their authority, potentially making legal determinations that will curtail 
tribal rights into the future.  The EPA must ensure that this Rule does not delegate final decision-making 
authority regarding the existence and extent of tribal reserved rights – an especially fraught possibility in 
cases in which treaty rights have not been adjudicated. 
   
III. 
 Procedural Concerns  
  
A. The Proposed Rule Codifies an Overly Deferential State Led Process 
 
As discussed above, the Voigt Task Force is appreciative of the Proposed Rule’s stated purpose to 
establish new requirements that build on existing regulations to provide a framework to “ensure that 
WQS protect applicable reserved rights.  These revisions to EPA’s existing WQS regulation are intended 
 
9 U.S. Constitution, Art. VI, cl. 2 (‘‘This constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be 
made in pursuance thereof; and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the authority of the 
United States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the judges in every state shall be bound 
thereby, anything in the constitution or laws of any State to the contrary notwithstanding.’’) 
10 The Proposed Rule recognizes that “Courts also have held that tribal reserved rights encompass 
subsidiary rights that are not explicitly addressed in treaty or statutory language but are necessary to 
render those rights meaningful,” and that “[t]ribal reserved rights to aquatic resources could be 
impaired by water quality levels that limit right holders’ ability to utilize their rights. Indeed, as 
described in section III.B of this preamble, courts have recognized that the right to a specific resource 
necessarily includes attendant protections in order to be rendered meaningful.”  87 Fed. Reg. 74364. 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 6 
 
to provide clarity, predictability, and transparency in EPA’s review of state WQS and promulgation of 
Federal WQS in waters where reserved rights to aquatic an/or aquatic-dependent resources apply.”  87 
Fed. Reg. at 74366.  However, the processes outlined in the Proposed Rule leave tribes in a position of 
relying on states to accurately collect and interpret information from tribes.  This is especially 
troublesome in the many parts of the Proposed Rule where the EPA merely states that the states should 
communicate with tribes and should balance competing lines of inquiry.   
 
This process does not differ substantially from the current rule or processes undertaken by states, 
and does not go far enough to ensure that tribal reserved rights are adequately considered in the 
development of new WQS.  EPA must acknowledge that the nature and scope of many treaty rights have 
been the subject of sometimes decades-long court battles, and the determination of the scope, location, 
and manner of the exercise of the rights may be controversial and be met with resistance by states.  The 
Voigt Task Force recommends: 
 
• 
The final rule should ensure that there is a system by which a minimum threshold for 
state engagement with rights holders is developed, and by which a uniform process for 
consideration of tribal reserved rights is developed.   
• 
The final rule should also create a system by which there is a minimum threshold of 
engagement between EPA and tribes to ensure the EPA retains its federal trust 
responsibility and does not improperly rely on the states. 
• 
EPA must require states to communicate early and often with tribes throughout their 
WQS processes. 
• 
The EPA must make clear that competing lines of inquiry must be balanced between the 
states and tribes. 
 
B. Additional Burden on Tribes 
 
The Proposed Rule offers three options for establishing WQS to protect tribal reserved rights – the 
state could adopt designated uses that explicitly recognize and identify tribal reserved rights to aquatic 
and/or aquatic-dependent resources and water quality criteria to protect those uses; the state could 
adopt criteria protective of tribal reserved rights and associate those criteria with a current designated 
use that already encompasses the tribal reserved rights; or the state could use its antidegradation policy 
to protect tribal reserved rights.  The amount of resources that would be required for tribes, especially 
tribes that have tribal reserved rights in multiple states, to adequately participate in these processes 
would be immense.  The triennial review process is used below to illustrate the potential burden and 
complexity of these processes. 
 
States are required to review their water quality standards every three years (“triennial review”), 
and, if appropriate, to revise or adopt new standards (CWA section 303(c)(1)) and any revised or new 
standards must be submitted to the EPA for review.  In this Proposed Rule, the EPA is proposing to 
modify the procedures for state review and revision of its water quality standards to require that the 
triennial review process include an evaluation of whether there are tribal reserved rights applicable to 
waters subject to the state’s WQS and whether WQS need to be revised to protect those rights. 
 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 7 
 
The proposed rule, at 40 CFR 131.20(a), provides a mechanism for starting the process of 
engagement with tribes -- it would require states to evaluate whether there are applicable tribal 
reserved rights relevant to waters subject to the state’s WQS during the public triennial review process. 
To help satisfy this requirement, the Proposed Rule says that states “should” explicitly request 
information regarding the nature and scope of tribal reserved rights in each triennial review.  This would 
provide an opportunity for the right holders to engage and provide information the state can use in its 
evaluation. 
 
Incorporating the evaluation of tribal reserved rights into already-existing state triennial review 
processes is likely to create complicated and onerous processes.  The states have independent triennial 
review schedules, and the schedule for review is likely to be different for each of the three states in 
which the Ceded Territories lie.  One triennial review process is a long and complicated process.  
Navigating three will be an onerous process for GLIFWC and its member tribes to participate in.  In 
addition, as a regulatory action, the proposed rule does not contemplate EPA funding for tribes to 
participate in the triennial review process.  GLIFWC staff currently work in a patchwork of WQS review 
processes and recognizes the amount of work it will take to participate effectively.  Therefore, based on 
the experience of GLIFWC staff, the Voigt Task Force recommends: 
 
• 
that EPA implement, in this rule, a process that coordinates the review between states that 
share ceded territories or usual and accustomed places;  
• 
that EPA ensure there are resources to support full time staff to effectively participate, and 
that the EPA has the resources to provide effective technical assistance; 
• 
that where tribal reserved rights have been adjudicated, there are no lines of inquiry to be 
made into the existence or scope of those rights; and 
• 
that the final rule prioritize adopting designated uses specific to tribal reserved rights. This 
way, it will be more difficult for tribal uses to be subsumed within other considerations. It 
may also be necessary to adopt specific criteria to protect tribal reserved rights as well as 
implement antidegradation measures. 
 
In addition to the additional burden to tribes with treaty rights in numerous states to participate in 
the triennial review processes of each state, multiple designated use processes would add complexity 
and burdens to GLIFWC staff and the staff of GLIFWC member tribes.  In this Proposed Rule, the EPA 
anticipates one area in which WQS may need to be adjusted to protect tribal reserved rights will be 
where a reserved right is not already accounted for as a designated or presently attained use for a 
waterbody, but that waterbody could be reasonably expected to support that right in the future.  In 
these cases, after determining whether tribal reserved rights apply and the level of water quality 
necessary to protect those rights, states would be required to revise their WQS to ensure the protection 
of those rights using designated uses, criteria, and/or antidegradation.  GLIFWC will likely be in a 
situation where the states of Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Michigan will set different designated uses and 
WQS in portions of the ceded territories that fall inside their respective state boundaries.  This will be a 
complicated patchwork of standards to navigate. 
 
The Voigt Task Force has the following recommendations to help alleviate the additional burden 
placed on tribes through this Proposed Rule: 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 8 
 
 
• 
As with the triennial review process, EPA should require states to work together in a 
ceded-territory wide review and designation process.   
• 
Emphasize protecting suitable habitats as protective of key resources.   
• 
The EPA must make it explicit that a tribe is not precluded from participating in any 
process for state revisions to existing or drafting new WQS if it does not participate in 
the initial process. 
• 
States must not be given the authority to make final determinations about the 
existence, nature, or scope of any tribal reserved right.  
• 
EPA should consider developing and hosting trainings for tribes regarding how the 
CWA can assist tribes in the protection of tribal reserved rights. Similarly, the EPA 
should consider hosting trainings (with tribes as co-hosts perhaps) for states regarding 
implementation of this rule change. 
• 
Tribes should be able to define their own designated uses in areas where they hold 
reserved rights; and states should not be able to veto these designations once tribes 
have made them. 
 
C. Process to Resolve Disagreements 
 
As discussed above, implementation of the Proposed Rule may result in situations in which a tribe 
and a state disagree.  As stated in the Federal Register notice, whether and where reserved rights exist 
would be “informed by several factors, including input from the right holders, other sources of 
information regarding relevant tribal reserved rights (including information about the geographic scope 
of those rights), and the available data to inform the level of water quality needed to protect the 
reserved rights.”  87 Fed. Reg. 74367.  The Federal Register notice goes on to say, “[f]or purposes of 
implementation of this proposed rulemaking, the critical information needed to determine if a reserved 
right applies to a state’s waters includes, but may not be limited to: (1) the nature of the right (i.e., a 
fishing right, a hunting right, a resource gathering right); (2) where the right applies (i.e., to a specific set 
of waterbodies or to waters generally within a broad geographic area); and (3) how the right is exercised 
by the right holders (e.g., for subsistence purposes).”  As discussed above, this inquiry should not be 
controversial in the case of GLIFWC’s member tribes. However, as will be discussed later, providing 
these types of evidence might be a sensitive request for several reasons, and the type of data used 
might cause states to argue their validity.   
 
The Federal Register notice goes on to lay out that “[t]hese proposed provisions would provide a 
role for the right holders in informing both the initial inquiry of whether tribal reserved rights apply and, 
where reserved rights are applicable, how those reserved rights could be protected through 
implementation of the requirements of the proposed rulemaking. Specifically, determinations regarding 
protection of tribal reserved rights should be made through a process of mutual consideration and 
discussion between right holders, states, and the Federal government.”  Id. at 74367 – 74368.  
 
After determining that treaty rights exist within a subject body of water, the proposed rule would 
require the state to derive WQS to protect any of those tribal reserved rights that were determined to 
be applicable. This would require determining the level of water quality necessary to protect users of 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 9 
 
the resource and/or the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource itself, based on available data. This, 
again, brings up the issue of types of data that will be discussed below.  For the purposes of this 
discussion, this is a point at which it is possible, if not likely, that the state(s) and tribe(s) can disagree as 
to the level of protection necessary.   
 
Another point of contention is in the determination of level of suppression. “Proposed 40 CFR 
131.9(a)(1) would require that WQS, to the extent supported by available data and information, be 
established to protect ‘the exercise of the tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or 
availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource.’’’  Id.  Because the Proposed Rule does not 
“establish any nationally applicable thresholds for unsuppressed levels or use of a resource,” this 
determination will be made on a case-by-case basis.  The supplementary information lays out a 
balancing test for making this determination:  “The unsuppressed level should balance heritage use of a 
resource with what is currently reasonably achievable for a particular waterbody. For example, in 
determining the unsuppressed level of a resource for the purpose of establishing WQS, it may be 
appropriate to take into consideration both heritage rates of use of that resource and factors that have 
substantially altered the pollutant burden, hydrology, or availability of the resource, such that use of the 
resource at heritage rates is not feasible.” 87 Fed. Reg. at 74369 (italics added).  This language does not 
require or provide weight for such a balancing test, and does not explain what, exactly, should be taken 
into consideration.   
 
In all these circumstances, the Federal Register notice is silent on what occurs when states and 
tribes disagree.  The Proposed Rule lacks any clear teeth to ensure that the states are giving the 
appropriate weight to the points of view of tribes or rights holders.  While, ultimately, the EPA must 
approve state WQS, and these regulations would require tribal reserved rights are considered in the 
process before new or updated WQS are approved, that is not enough.  At the least, the final rule should 
explicitly require states to show how the information and data provided by tribes were considered in the 
various processes outlined in this Proposed Rule.  Additionally, the final rule should make clear that the 
information provided by tribes and rights holders, specifically including information that was provided 
through Indigenous Knowledge, or TEK, processes, must be weighted equally to the information 
provided by states and through western scientific processes.   
 
On November 15, 2021, the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy (“OSTP”) and the 
White House Council on Environmental Quality (“CEQ”) jointly released a memorandum that commits to 
elevating TEK in federal scientific policy processes.11  This memo defines “TEK [as] a body of 
observations, oral and written knowledge, practices, and beliefs that promote environmental 
sustainability stewardship of natural resources through relationships between humans and 
environmental systems.”12  This memorandum also formally recognizes TEK as one of many bodies of 
knowledge that are valuable to improving policy making, and that its inclusion in federal policy making is 
consistent with the Administrations commitment to “scientific integrity and knowledge-and evidence-
 
11 Office of Science and Technology Policy, Council on Environmental Quality.  Indigenous Traditional 
Ecological Knowledge and Federal Decision Making [Memorandum].  (November 15, 2021).   
12 Id at 2. 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 10 
 
based policymaking.”13  While it is up to Indigenous communities to define TEK, this memo makes clear 
that knowledge based on traditional teachings and life experience, and shared through stories has at 
least as much weight as other forms of knowledge – including data and information shared through 
western scientific methods – when it comes to influencing federal decision making.  The EPA must make 
clear that the states must evaluate such information received from rights holders, and must show the 
EPA how that information was integrated into their WQS or anti-degradation processes. 
 
Historically, tribes and states have ideologically differed on approaching water quality management, 
from how climate change will impact water resources, to cumulative impacts.  The often-differing 
approaches have the potential to lead to conflicting data and priorities, as well as different standards for 
designated uses.  As part of its federal treaty obligations and trust responsibility, the EPA must ensure 
that states do not run roughshod over any conflicting data or competing ideologies that come from 
tribes with tribal reserved rights.  This Proposed Rule must make clear how such differences will be 
addressed and resolved.   
 
IV. 
  Data Concerns 
 
A.  Potentially Sensitive Information 
 
As discussed above, the EPA acknowledges that it may be a complex inquiry to determine if tribal 
reserved rights apply in waters subject to state WQS and, if so, understand the nature of those rights 
and where they apply.  The EPA views the critical information for this determination to be the nature of 
the right (i.e., a fishing right, hunting right, a resource gathering right); where the right applies (i.e., to a 
specific set of waterbodies or to waters generally within a broad geographic area); and how the right is 
exercised by the right holders (e.g., for subsistence purposes).  This line of inquiry runs several risks. One 
of the risks is that the inquiry requires the provision of information that could be deemed sensitive. 
There are several very good reasons to protect sensitive information.  Certain waterbodies or aquatic-
dependent resources may be used for cultural or religious uses.  Locations of certain resources may be 
guarded to protect against their harvesting by non-rights holders. 
 
 As an example, in the relationship between GLIFWC member tribes and the United States Forest 
Service, it is understood that tribes may not wish to disclose particular medicinal plants that they 
harvest, nor the locations of those activities. For example, the Memorandum of Understanding that 
implements treaty reserved gathering rights on Forest Service lands commits the parties to protect and 
restore native communities and species diversity; general language that recognizes that a diversity of 
healthy ecosystems is necessary for tribal traditional practices.   
 
Accepting such generalized information may be a hard pill for some states to swallow.  Because the 
Proposed Rule currently leaves it up to the states to determine whether and to what extent a tribal right 
exists in discrete cases14, it is potentially less likely that a state will accept the existence of a tribal 
 
13 Id at 1. 
14 Again, the Voigt Task Force reiterates that the final rule must make clear that any adjudicated tribal 
reserved rights are not subject to such inquiry. 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 11 
 
reserved right in an area without more specific data than the rights holders may be willing to provide.  
The Voigt Task Force recommends: 
 
• 
Any final rule should recognize the sensitivity of some of this information, especially in light 
of the sometimes-fraught relationships between tribes and states, and require states to 
respect tribal boundaries for sharing sensitive information. 
• 
Any final rule should create a standard practice for how sensitive information will be dealt 
with in the WQS processes. 
• 
Any sensitive information should explicitly be protected from Freedom of Information Act 
requests. 
 
B.  Role of Indigenous Knowledge 
 
Another issue is the type of data that may exist around Indigenous Knowledge, or TEK.  In a 
footnote, the EPA recognizes the importance of encouraging the use of TEK in making the determination 
of whether tribal reserved rights apply, and recognizes that the EPA and right holders should determine 
in those instances the rules of information gathered through TEK.  However, there is nothing in the body 
of language accompanying the Proposed Rule that makes it clear that TEK is not only acceptable, but 
that information gathered through Indigenous Knowledge should have the same weight as the 
information that is provided through western science.  Additionally, the Proposed Rule repeatedly states 
a preference for and reliance on peer-reviewed studies.  As discussed in subsection III(C) above, this 
goes against the express policy of the Administration.  The Voigt Task Force recommends: 
 
• 
A final rule must make it clear within the rule itself the importance of TEK in the WQS 
processes.   
• 
States must show how information from tribes, including TEK, was incorporated into 
their decision-making. 
• 
When facing conflicting information from TEK and western scientific data, EPA must err 
on the side of protecting and restoring resources, as contemplated in the CWA itself. 
 
V. 
 Lack of Clear Criteria 
 
The Proposed Rule clarifies that rights holders cannot be impacted by water quality to a greater 
degree than non-tribal populations. However, the rule should also make clear that the EPA would not 
accept WQS that would decrease protection to equalize the impacts across populations.  
 
When making a determination about suppression levels, the EPA suggests that the unsuppressed 
level should balance heritage use of a resource with what is currently reasonably achievable for a 
particular waterbody.  There should be clear criteria for this balancing act, so that states cannot rely on 
an argument that heritage usage is unachievable.  With regard to suppression levels, the Voigt Task 
Force recommends: 
 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 12 
 
• 
States should be required to incorporate available data and information that includes 
tribally produced historical data about resource abundance and location, as well as historical 
and current tribal uses of resources. 
• 
When analyzing data and making decisions, the extent to which the tribal reserved rights 
have already been diminished, as well as the length of time rights holders were prevented 
from exercising their reserved rights, should be taken into consideration. 
• 
Suppression must include both a consumption component and a location component. For 
example, there are lakes in the ceded territory that cannot be accessed due to land 
ownership patterns. Unsuppressed use would imply that theses lake should be protected 
just as lakes with current tribal use. 
• 
Antidegradation provisions must apply broadly to habitat types within the areas in which 
tribal reserved rights exist, as well as specific geographic locations (i.e., lakes or streams) as 
defined by the rights holders. 
 
VI. 
Enforcement 
 
The EPA should be explicit in this rule that states must not only set standards that protect tribal 
reserved rights, but that they must enforce those standards. Unfortunately, the State of Minnesota’s 
sulfate standard (set explicitly to protect wild rice) provides an excellent example of a state’s failure to 
implement and enforce an existing, approved standard. The EPA should consider authorizing tribes (or 
properly delegated intertribal agencies) to confirm that states are respecting standards set to protect 
tribal uses, perhaps by implementing a procedure similar to the 401 certification that is currently used 
by tribes for on-reservation water quality standards compliance. 
 
VII. 
Specific requests for information 
 
 The EPA makes several specific requests for information throughout the Proposed Rule.  The Voigt 
Task Force has attempted to provide answers to as many as possible below. 
 
A.  Tribal Reserved Rights. 
 
The Proposed Rule adds a new definition to 40 CFR 131.3 defining “tribal reserved rights” as “any 
rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or 
implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of federal law.” The EPA 
requests comment on whether there are additional types of tribal reserved rights that it should 
consider.   
 
The definition should make clear that tribal reserved rights can include not only hunting, fishing, and 
gathering rights, but cultural, subsistence, ceremonial, religious, and economic uses.  The definition 
should also make clear that “aquatic and/or aquatic dependent resources” includes, but is not limited 
to, aquatic and wetland plants, aquatic and amphibious animals, and waterfowl, including migratory 
birds. 
 
B.  Types of Historic Information to be Considered. 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 13 
 
 
The Proposed Rule states that evidence to be used when determining the level of water quality 
necessary to protect a right include fish consumption rate surveys, studies or accounts of heritage fish 
consumption rates, peer-reviewed articles or reports on the types and levels of pollutants that can 
adversely affect the resource in question, and monitoring data reflecting historical and/or current water 
quality.  The EPA requests comment on the types of historic information that states and the EPA should 
consider. 
 
This is a good place for the Proposed Rule to make clear that Indigenous Knowledge is vital to the 
inquiry.  Indigenous Knowledge often entails the use of stories to demonstrate the interconnectedness 
of an ecosystem, information that cannot be easily captured in a data sets.  In this way, Indigenous 
Knowledge could reveal the water quality necessary to protect a set of interconnected resources. 
 
C.  Unsuppressed Tribal Reserved Rights. 
 
The EPA requests comments on whether additional language should be included in the final rule 
specifying the considerations for determining unsuppressed WQS. 
 
This is another place where it would be important to include language specific to TEK.  Specifically, 
the language could read: 
 
(a)  Water quality standards must protect tribal reserved rights applicable to waters 
subject to such standards.  To protect tribal reserved rights, water quality 
standards must, to the extent supported by available data and information, 
including Traditional Ecological Knowledge and tribal historical data, be 
established to protect:  …. 
 
The EPA limits its proposed interpretation regarding suppression to protecting “reasonably 
anticipated future uses, taking into account factors that may have substantially altered a waterbody.” 
Fed. Reg. at 74366-67. This interpretation is too limited. Restoration efforts are planned or underway  
for a number of resources where substantial alterations have occurred but can be reversed or corrected. 
Protecting the habitat conditions that can allow for a reasonably anticipated future use should be 
considered a part of achieving an unsuppressed use. 
 
D.  Conflicting Information, Gaps in Information, Differences of Opinion. 
 
Where information is conflicting, there are gaps in information, and/or a difference of opinion exists 
between the state and one or more tribes about the level of water quality necessary to protect a 
reserved right, the EPA requests comment on factors it should consider when making decisions. 
 
The EPA should consider the overall purpose and intent of the Clean Water Act itself when making 
decisions.  The intent of the CWA is to “restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological 
integrity of the Nation’s waters,” as it states in section 101(a).  Any consideration of conflicting or 

Comments from the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife Commission 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID:  EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
March 6, 2023 
Page 14 
 
missing information and differences of opinions should always err on the side of protection and 
restoration, thus fulfilling this intent.   
 
E.  How States Can Revise Designated Uses. 
 
The EPA requests comment on whether and how states can revise designated uses, as provided for 
by 40 CFR 131.10, while also ensuring the protection of tribal reserved rights.  Specifically, EPA 
requested comment on whether any discrete additions to the current regulatory framework may be 
necessary to protect tribal reserved rights. The final rule must include language that prevents a change 
in a designated use, and/or prevents the issuance of a variance on a waterbody that would impact tribal 
reserved rights, without consultation with and agreement of the impacted tribe(s). 
 
The EPA must make an addition to the regulatory framework that requires both existing and 
revisions to designated uses encompass protection of tribal reserved rights at their unsuppressed level. 
 
The Voigt Task Force appreciates the EPA’s willingness to exercise its treaty obligations and trust 
responsibility in a manner that promotes the protection of tribal reserved rights under the auspices of 
the Clean Water Act. It hopes these comments will further strengthen the final rule. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
James G. Thannum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acting Executive Administrator

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0229 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
{mmanahan.1} 
#15711134v10 
15711134.8.8.4.3 
March 6, 2023 
FILED VIA ERULEMAKING PORTAL 
www.regulations.gov  
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
EPA Docket Center, Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
120 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 
Washington, DC 20460  
RE: 
Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved 
Rights, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
On behalf of a coalition of Maine municipalities and quasi-municipal entities,1 we are offering 
these comments on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) proposed rule “Water 
Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights” (the “Proposed 
Rule”) under the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251, et seq. (“CWA”), 87 Fed. Reg. 74361 
(December 5, 2022). 
The coalition requests that EPA expressly recognize that the Proposed Rule, if adopted, 
would not apply in Maine.  It would not apply in Maine because (1) it would affect the 
regulatory jurisdiction of the State of Maine, and the Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act 
(“MICSA”), 25 U.S.C. §§ 1721-1735, provides that no federal law which accords a special 
status or right to Indians shall apply in Maine if it affects the jurisdiction of the State of 
Maine, and (2) the Maine tribes’ sustenance fishing right is derived from Maine state law – 
the Maine Implementing Act (the “MIA”), 30 M.R.S. §§ 6201-6214 – not from federal law.  
Further, the Maine tribes’ right to sustenance fishing does not guarantee a special quality 
and quantity of fish.  And, in any case, Maine has adopted human health criteria that are 
sufficiently protective of sustenance fishing by Maine tribal members, so there is no need for 
EPA to seek any more restrictive standards to protect tribal members in Maine.  
I.
The Settlement Acts
In 1980 the United States, the State of Maine, and the Penobscot Nation and 
Passamaquoddy Tribe entered into a settlement agreement that is embodied in MICSA and 
its state law counterpart, the MIA (collectively known as the Settlement Acts).  Attached as 
1 The coalition includes the following towns, cities, and sanitary districts: Town of Baileyville, City of 
Calais, Town of Carrabassett Valley, Town of Dover-Foxcroft, Town of East Millinocket, Guilford-
Sangerville Sanitary District, Town of Howland, Lincoln Sanitary District, Town of Mattawamkeag, 
Town of Millinocket, and Veazie Sewer District. 
MATTHEW D. MANAHAN 
Merrill’s Wharf 
254 Commercial Street 
Portland, ME 04101 
P 207.791.1189 
F 207.791.1350 
C 207.807.4653 
mmanahan@pierceatwood.com 
pierceatwood.com 
Admitted in: MA, ME, NH 

Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
March 6, 2023 
Page 2 
Exhibit A is an article I co-authored in 2016 that summarizes the background of the 
Settlement Acts.  Relations between Maine tribes, the State of Maine, and the federal 
government are now controlled by the Settlement Acts.  Under the Settlement Acts, Maine 
and Maine tribes have a relationship unlike any other tribal-state relationship in the United 
States in which Maine tribes are subject to all laws of the State of Maine, including 
environmental laws.2  
II.
The EPA’s proposed amendments cannot be applied in Maine under 25
U.S.C. § 1725(h).
MICSA provides, in 25 U.S.C. § 1725(h), that no federal law or regulation shall apply within 
Maine if it (1) accords or relates to a special status or right of or to any Indians or Indian 
lands, and (2) affects or preempts the jurisdiction of the State of Maine, expressly including 
laws of the State relating to land use or environmental matters.  Because the Proposed Rule 
would accord a special status or right to Indians, and because it would affect the jurisdiction 
of the State of Maine with respect to Maine’s environmental laws, it cannot apply in Maine.3  
III.
Maine tribes’ sustenance fishing right is a product of Maine State law,
not federal law.
As the Supplementary Information accompanying the Proposed Rule recognizes, “tribes in 
Maine have statutorily-reserved rights to practice traditional sustenance lifeways such as 
fishing in certain waters,” citing to the MIA, 30 M.R.S. § 6207(4).4  Those “certain” waters 
are limited to waters within the boundaries of the Penobscot and Passamaquoddy Indian 
reservations.5 Although the MICSA “approved, ratified, and confirmed” the MIA in Section 
1725(b)(1), MICSA did not adopt or enact MIA as federal law.  Thus, the Maine tribes’ 
sustenance fishing right does not meet the Proposed Rule’s definition of a “Tribal reserved 
right,” which is “any rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held 
by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other 
sources of Federal law” (emphasis added).6  The source of the Maine tribes’ sustenance 
fishing right, the MIA, is Maine law, not federal law.  
2 The First Circuit Court of Appeals has explicitly held that Maine tribes do not have “authority (vis-à-
vis the State) to regulate pollution by non-Indians within the tribes’ territories.”  Maine v. Johnson, 
498 F.3d 37, 45-47 (1st Cir. 2007).   
3 As EPA notes in its Supplementary Information, at note 17, the First Circuit has held that “the Indian 
canons of construction” EPA has previously used to try to avoid these clear MISCA requirements “were 
inapplicable to statutes settling Indian land claims in Maine.”  See Supplementary Information, n.17, 
citing to Penobscot Nation v. Frey, 3 F.4th 484, 502 (1st Cir. 2021). 
4 Note that Section 6207 does not, in fact, provide rights to practice “traditional sustenance lifeways” 
beyond fishing. 
5 The First Circuit Court of Appeals has held that the Penobscot Reservation “does not include the 
waters and submerged lands constituting the riverbed of the Main Stem” of the Penobscot River.  
Penobscot Nation v. Frey, 3 F.4th 484, 488 (1st Cir. 2021).   
6 Prior treaties with the Maine tribes “no longer have any meaning independent of the Settlement Acts, 
and MICSA is clear that Maine no longer has any responsibilities to the Nation under the treaties.”  
Penobscot Nation v. Frey, 3 F.4th 484, 498 (1st Cir. 2021). 

Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
March 6, 2023 
Page 3 
IV.
The Maine tribes’ right to sustenance fishing does not guarantee a
special quality and quantity of fish.
Additionally, even if the source of the Maine tribes’ sustenance fishing right were in federal 
law, that right does not provide a right to any special quality and quantity of fish.  There is 
nothing in the Settlement Acts that suggests that MIA was intended to provide Maine tribes 
a right to a higher quality of fish than that to which other Maine citizens are entitled.  In 
fact, at the time of the Settlement Acts in 1980 Maine fish were fewer and more 
contaminated with pollutants than they are today, and it could not have been the case that 
MIA was intended to ensure that the tribes had a right to consume fish of a different, better 
quality than the fish that swam in Maine waters at that time.  Please see Exhibit B, a June 3, 
1997, letter to EPA from Maine’s Attorney General, at pages 4-6, for further discussion of 
this point.   
EPA’s current position is contrary to its prior stated position, which was that MIA’s tribal 
right to sustenance fishing does not equate to a separate water quality standard.  In 2020, 
when EPA approved Maine’s WQS, it noted that “the Settlement Acts themselves do not 
address or reference designated uses, water quality criteria, or the desired condition or use 
goal of the waters covered by the sustenance fishing provisions.  Rather, MIA refers to a 
type of fishing/consumption that can occur in certain waters, and that consumption can be 
protected under the State’s fishing designated use,” rather than reinterpreting that 
designated use to include a subcategory of sustenance fishing.  Further, MIA’s provision of 
certain sustenance fishing rights “does not constitute the establishment of a new or different 
water quality goal use that EPA must review under the CWA.”7  Therefore, EPA’s position 
now, that MIA’s right to sustenance fishing guarantees Maine tribes a special quality and 
quantity of fish, contradicts EPA’s prior position that the sustenance fishing right is not a 
water quality standard, but simply “a clear recognition of where sustenance fishing can 
occur.”   
V.
Maine has already incorporated sustenance fishing into its WQS.
In any case, there is no cause for EPA to be concerned about the quality of fish being 
consumed by Maine tribal members, because Maine has already accounted for sustenance 
fishing in its WQS.  As EPA notes in its Supplementary Information, at note 34, “After 
subsequent collaboration among the State, EPA, and the tribes, in 2019 the State of Maine 
adopted a new sustenance fishing designated use subcategory which addresses tribal 
sustenance fishing.” 
For waters subject to the sustenance fishing designated use the assumed fish consumption 
rate is 200 grams per day (g/day),8 which is higher than the observed unsuppressed fish 
consumption rate for Maine tribes.9  Maine also implemented a cancer risk level of 10-6 in 
7 U.S. EPA, Withdrawal of Certain of EPA’s February 2, 2015, Decisions Concerning Water Quality 
Standards for Waters in Indian Lands (2020), p. 20. 
8 38 M.R.S. § 466-A(1).  
9 Ebert et al., Estimating Consumption of Freshwater Fish among Maine Anglers (1993). 

Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
March 6, 2023 
Page 4 
#15711134
waters subject to sustenance fishing, which is the risk level that EPA recommends in its 
proposed WQS amendments.  Thus, because Maine’s WQS already account for tribal 
sustenance fishing, there is no cause for concern.  
VI.
The Proposed Rule misstates the scope of the Maine Tribes’ sustenance
fishing right.
The Proposed Rule misstates the Maine tribes’ right to sustenance fishing to make it broader 
than provided by MIA.  As noted above, EPA claims that Maine tribes have a right to practice 
“traditional sustenance lifeways such as fishing,” suggesting that that right extends to some 
unnamed “lifeways” beyond merely fishing.  That suggestion is false.  Under 30 M.R.S. § 
6207(4), the members of the Penobscot Nation and the Passamaquoddy Tribe have a 
statutorily reserved right only to “take fish.”  EPA’s attempt to expand the Maine tribal 
members’ reserved sustenance fishing right in this manner is entirely unsupported.  The 
Proposed Rule is, in short, an overreach that would violate the Settlement Acts. 
VII.
The Proposed Rule would create unnecessary regulatory uncertainty.
Finally, the Proposed Rule would create an enormous amount of regulatory uncertainty.  The 
rule would require states to establish WQS that protect “the exercise of tribal reserved 
rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent 
resource.”  This standard is not a standard at all, but a broad and subjective requirement to 
protect all possible tribal consumption in a hypothetical pristine environment, regardless of 
the presence of fish, in any amount.  This is not a standard at all, but a dictate of pristine 
water quality, and one that would make it impossible for a permittee, or an entity 
considering applying for a permit, to predict whether they could comply with the new limits 
that this rule would require.  It would create enormous regulatory uncertainty, and is an 
overreach of EPA’s regulatory authority.  
* 
* 
* 
We appreciate the opportunity to comment on the Proposed Rule and your careful 
consideration of these comments.  
Sincerely, 
Matthew D. Manahan 
Enclosures 
cc: 
Hon. Janet Mills, Governor of Maine 
Hon. Susan Collins 
Hon. Angus King 
Commissioner Melanie Loyzim, Maine DEP 

 
 
 
Exhibit A 
 
 
 

Water, Tribal Claitns, and Maine's 
Not-So-Settled Settletnent Acts 
Matthew D. Manahan and Catherine R. Connors 
I 
n most regions of the United States, control over natural 
resources vis-a-vis American Indian (hereinafter Indian) 
tribes is addressed at the federal level. Maine, however, 
is not like other states. The history of federal-state-tribal 
control over Maine waters tells a unique and at times tortured 
tale still being written in the courts. The moral of the story so 
far is that, with sufficient financing and fading memories, even 
the clearest settlement language will be challenged, over and 
over and over again. 
In examining the period when colonists from England, and 
later Massachusetts, settled throughout the area that eventu-
ally became Maine, historians differ as to how many Indians 
lived in the area, whether they were nomadic or riverine, orga-
nized or conquered, where they could be found, and when. As 
of 1820, however, when Maine became a state, it was clear 
that few Indians remained, and they were regulated by state, 
not federal, authorities. As Congress stated, since 1820, the 
state of Maine "provided special services to the Indians resid-
ing within its borders," while the United States "provided few 
special services to the ... [tribes] ... and repeatedly denied 
that it had jurisdiction over or responsibility" for them." 25 
U.S.C. § 172l(a)(7). 
After 150 years of such state oversight, however, Maine was 
hit with a legal lightning bolt. In 1972, the Passamaquoddy 
Tribe and the Penobscot Nation filed suit in federal court in 
Maine, asking the court to require the U.S. Department of the 
Interior (DOI) to file suit against the state for the return of the 
tribes' aboriginal lands. The tribes argued that certain treaties 
between the tribes and Maine and Massachusetts were invalid 
because they were not approved by Congress, as required by 
the Indian Nonintercourse Act of 1790, 25 U.S.C. § 177. 
This theory about the Nonintercourse Act, combined with 
a U.S. Supreme Court ruling in 1974 finding federal subject 
matter jurisdiction for tribal land claims, led to a cascade of 
similar lawsuits by other tribes in other states. 
In the Maine litigation, the trial court agreed with the 
theory, and the First Circuit Court of Appeals upheld that 
decision. See Passamaquoddy Tribe v. Morton, 528 F2d 370 (1st 
Cir. 1975). After Morton gave the Indians' position traction, 
the first settlement of a tribal land claim in this wave of liti-
gation came in 1978. Congress, which must approve all such 
settlements, agreed to a settlement in Rhode Island with the 
Narragansett Tribe, which had claimed a few thousand acres of 
land. 
Mr. Manahan and Ms. Connors represent the coalition of municipalities 
and businesses supporting the position of the state of Maine in Penobscot 
Nation v. Mills. Mr. Manahan may be reached at mmanahan@ 
pierceatwood. com, and Ms. Connors may be reached at cconnors@ 
pierceatwood. com. 
24 
In Maine, however, the stakes were far higher-the tribes 
were claiming two-thirds of the land mass of the state. As 
Congress put it: "Substantial economic and social hardship to 
a large number of landowners, citizens, and communities in 
the State of Maine, and therefore to the economy of the State 
of Maine as a whole, will result if the aforementioned claims 
are not resolved promptly." 25 U.S.C. § 1721(a)(6). The law 
firm of Ropes & Gray issued an opinion that a state munici-
pal bond issue could not go forward using property within the 
claimed territory as collateral. Title companies refused to write 
title insurance for any land claimed by the tribes in Maine, 
causing residential and commercial transactions in these areas 
to come to a halt. 
Much negotiation ensued. At one point, Archibald Cox 
of Watergate fame was on the tribes' side, with famed defense 
attorney Edward Bennett Williams representing the state. 
There were multiple task forces appointed by President Carter; 
the tribes' main ally in Congress was defeated in his Senate 
re-election bid; and Senators Edmund Muskie and George 
Mitchell, among others, played roles. Eventually a final deal 
was struck in 1980, when the possibility of Ronald Reagan's 
election as the next president raised the specter that he might 
veto a settlement favorable to the tribes were he elected. 
The resulting, comprehensive settlement, agreed upon by 
the United States, the state of Maine, the Penobscot Nation, 
and the Passamaquoddy Tribe, is embodied in the federal 
Maine Indian Land Claims Settlement Act and its state law 
counterpart, the Maine Implementing Act (collectively, the 
Settlement Acts). Under the terms of the Settlement Acts, 
the Maine tribes agreed to extinguishment of their claims in 
exchange for the establishment of Indian Reservation and Ter-
ritory lands, and to payment to the tribes of over $81 million 
(about $230 million in 2016 dollars). As the Settlement Acts 
recite, the purpose of the settlement was to remove the cloud 
on titles, settle all the tribes' claims, and clarify the status of 
the other land and natural resources in the state. 25 U.S.C. 
§ 1721(b). 
The Settlement Acts were unique in establishing a new 
type of relationship between the federal, state, and tribal gov-
ernments unlike the relationship of any tribes to any other 
state, with the Indians "subject to all laws of the State of 
Maine." Id. § 1721 (b)(4 ). The Settlement Acts gave the state 
of Maine civil and criminal-including environmental-juris-
diction over Maine Indian lands: 
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, all Indians, 
Indian nations, and tribes and bands of Indians in the 
State and any lands or other natural resources owned by 
them, held in trust for them by the United States or by 
NR&E Fall 2016 

any other person or entity shall be subject to the laws of 
the State and to the civil and criminal jurisdiction of the 
courts of the State to the same extent as any other per-
son or lands or other natural resources therein. 
30 M.R.S. § 6204. 
Thus, this settlement among the federal, state, and tribal 
governments created a jurisdictional arrangement unlike what 
exists in western states, where state laws are generally not 
applicable to tribes or tribal lands. Except as to "internal tribal 
matters," under the Settlement Acts, Maine tribes are subject 
to Maine law, and have the same governmental authority as a 
Maine municipality. Tribal members may catch fish for their 
individual sustenance and not be subjected to state fishing 
license requirements and bag limits, but with limits to prevent 
overfishing. The Settlement Acts explicitly provide that no fed-
eral laws or regulations intended to accord any special right or 
status to any Indians or Indian lands and affect or preempt the 
regulatory jurisdiction of the state of Maine-including envi-
ronmental regulatory jurisdiction-apply to the Maine tribes. 
In sum, the Settlement Acts were designed to be just that: 
a comprehensive and global settlement of all tribal claims in 
Maine. The legal framework adopted was clear, incorporat-
ing a unique state-tribal relationship, in which there was no 
interference with the tribes' self-governance, but regulatory 
authority remained with the state. 
End of story? Oh no. This was just the beginning. 
Tribal Opposition to Maine NPDES 
Delegation 
Time passed, and the Maine tribes no longer wanted to be 
unique. They are federally recognized, and would like the same 
federal sovereign-to-sovereign relationship as their western 
counterparts. Federal administrative bodies, comfortable with 
the general federal-tribal regulatory template, have no stake 
in maintaining the state of Maine's interests. Hence, after a 
short lull to let memories fade, the tribes' pushback began in 
the early 1990s. As a part of this federal-tribal cooperative 
effort, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) even 
entered into "Tribal Environmental Agreements," requiring 
EPA to do everything in its power to prevent disclosure under 
the Freedom of Information Act of its communications with 
the Maine tribes, leaving the state of Maine in the dark about 
their discussions. 
The first avenue pressed to expand tribal regulatory 
authority focused on "internal tribal matters"-the area of self-
control not subject to state regulation under the terms of the 
Settlement Acts. The argument was launched that this self-
governance exemption was far broader than it appears on its 
face, embracing water quality and its regulation. 
The Clean Water Act (CWA) National Pollutant Dis-
charge Elimination System (NPDES) program requires a 
permit for the discharge of any pollutant into navigable waters. 
33 U.S.C. § 1342(a). The CWA assigns permitting responsi-
bilities first to EPA, but a state may apply to EPA to administer 
the NPDES program for discharges into navigable waters 
within its jurisdiction. 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b). The EPA admin-
istrator "shall approve each submitted program unless he 
determines that adequate authority does not exist." Id. 
NR&E Fall 2016 
In November 1999, the state of Maine submitted an appli-
cation to EPA seeking NPDES delegation for the entire state, 
including areas that may fall within or near "Indian Territory," 
for authority to issue wastewater discharge permits under 
the CWA. (Indiari Territory is a defined term under the Set-
tlement Acts, including reservations and some additional 
property acquired by DOI for the tribes.) 
The legal framework adopted 
for the Settlement Acts was 
clear, incorporating a unique 
state-tribal relationship, 
in which there was no 
interference with the tribes' 
self-governance, but regulatory 
authority remained 
with the state. 
The tribes in Maine objected, saying they thought the fed-
eral government should retain oversight in tribal territories 
because, they alleged, the state does not have authority over 
tribal waters. In January 2001, EPA approved Maine's applica-
tion to implement the NPDES program, but only in areas of 
the state "outside Indian Country." That partial approval took 
no action on the state's program obligation as it applied to the 
territories and lands of the four federally recognized Indian 
tribes in Maine. EPA said it needed to study further what to do 
in Indian Territory. 
On October 31, 2003, EPA authorized the state to imple-
ment the NPDES program as it applies to the territories of the 
Penobscots and the Passamaquoddies. EPA did not, however, 
delegate permitting authority for "disputed" Indian Territory, 
including tribal facilities located on tribal reservations that 
discharge into Maine's navigable waters, characterizing such 
discharges as "internal tribal matters." EPA said it would apply 
a balancing test to determine whether the state or the tribes 
have jurisdiction over specific discharges, and expressed its 
intent to protect fish that the tribes may catch for sustenance 
purposes by imposing conditions in Maine-issued NPDES per-
mits to non-Indian dischargers not in Indian Territory and by 
taking over Maine's water quality standards. 
The state of Maine appealed EPA's decision to the First Cir-
cuit Court of Appeals. The court agreed with the state and 
rejected EPA's and the tribes' position. In so ruling, the court 
noted that it had no need to wade into any dispute about 
Indian Territory, because Maine has jurisdiction over all dis-
charges in the state, including those within Indian Territory 
and over tribal discharges themselves. See Maine v. Johnson, 
498 F.3d 37 (1st Cir. 2007). 
Did that end the discussion? Guess again. 
25 

i 11 
I' 
Penobscot Efforts to Regulate the Penobscot 
Ri'Ver: Application for TAS 
The Passamaquoddy Tribe and the Penobscot Nation have 
applied several times over the past 15 years for treatment 
as a state (TAS) under section 518 of the CWA, 33 U.S.C. 
§ 1377(e). EPA has granted TAS to the tribes, but only for the 
limited purpose of obtaining federal funds to develop water 
quality standards. Notwithstanding that the First Circuit ruled 
in 2007 that the state, not Maine tribes, regulates water qual-
ity under the Settlement Acts, in 2012, the Penobscot Nation 
applied again for TAS status, this time accompanied by water 
quality standards funded by the EPA, which the Nation had 
developed and for which it seeks EPA approval. EPA has not 
yet acted on the 2012 TAS application. 
If EPA grants TAS authority 
to the Penobscot Nation, the 
state of Maine will be required 
to ensure that all nontribal 
discharges licensed by the 
state and that may affect 
Penobscot Nation waters meet 
the Penobscot Nation's water 
quality standards. 
IfEPA grants TAS authority to the Penobscot Nation, then 
the state of Maine will be required to ensure that all nontribal 
discharges licensed by the state and that may affect Penobscot 
N ation waters-wherever these, waters may be-meet the 
Penobscot Nation's water quality standards, regardless of how-
ever stringent and inconsistent the Nation's standards may be 
in comparison with state standards. The Penobscot Nation 
is not required to consider nontribal members' comments in 
adopting their standards, or to consider impacts to economic 
interests. So, for example, if the Penobscot River-the longest 
river located entirely in Maine, running through the middle 
of the state-were deemed to affect Penobscot Nation waters, 
then Maine towns and companies along its banks, already 
meeting some of the most stringent water quality standards 
in the country, could potentially be required to spend mil-
lions of dollars they do not have to meet these additional tribal 
standards. 
Penobscot Efforts to Regulate the Penobscot 
Ri'Ver: Penobscot Nation v. Mills 
The next assault on the Settlement Acts arrived in the form 
of a tribal-federal lawsuit against the state of Maine to define 
the Penobscot Nation's reservation to include much of the 
Penobscot River. 
In August 2012, Maine Attorney General William 
26 
Schneider learned that Penobscot Nation officials had stopped 
nontribal duck hunters on the Penobscot River and told them 
a tribal permit was required to hunt anywhere on the river. 
The state later discovered that the tribe had summoned non-
tribal hunters to tribal court, even though the Settlement Acts 
do not subject nontribal members to the jurisdiction of tribal 
courts. 
In the wake of the tribe's actions, Schneider issued an opin-
ion regarding jurisdiction on the Penobscot River and invited 
the tribe to meet with him. With respect to control of the 
Penobscot River, Schneider wrote: 
[T]he River itself is not part of the Penobscot Nation's 
Reservation, and therefore is not subject to its regulatory 
authority or proprietary control. The Penobscot River 
is held in trust by the State for all Maine citizens, and 
State law, including statutes and regulations governing 
hunting, are fully applicable there. Accordingly, mem-
bers of the public engaged in hunting, fishing or other 
recreational activities on the waters of the Penobscot 
River are subject to Maine law as they would be else-
where in the State, and are not subject to any additional 
restrictions from the Penobscot Nation. 
Letter from Maine Attorney General William J. Schneider to 
Chandler Woodcock, commissioner of the Maine Department 
of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife, and Colonel Joel T. Wilkin-
son, Maine Warden Service, Aug. 8, 2012, at 2. 
The Penobscot Nation responded by filing suit against the 
attorney general in the United States District Court for the 
District of Maine, claiming that its reservation includes the 
entire 60cmile stretch of the main stem of the Penobscot River 
north from its primary reservation island (the Main Stem), 
including the submerged lands, and that it has exclusive juris-
diction over that portion of the river. The Penobscot Nation 
asserted that it has retained aboriginal title to the waters and 
riverbed of the Main Stem. As a result, it claimed that the 
boundaries of the Penobscot Reservation are actually the river 
banks found on either side of the Main Stem. According to 
the Penobscot Nation, these boundaries result in the Penob-
scot Nation having exclusive authority within its Main Stem 
reservation to regulate hunting, trapping, and other taking of 
wildlife for the sustenance of the individual members of the 
Penobscot Nation. 
Although the allegations in the Penobscot Nation's law-
suit focused on whether hunting and fishing by members of 
the Penobscot Nation are subject to regulation by the state 
of Maine, the legal bases for that position, if accepted by the 
court, would support the Penobscot Nation's efforts to regulate 
all activities on the Penobscot River. 
The Maine attorney general is elected by the Maine legis-
lature, so after the Democrats regained control of legislature, 
Schneider was replaced by Janet Mills. Mills continued to 
defend Maine's position in the Penobscot Nation's lawsuit, 
arguing that the Penobscot Nation does not have the right to 
regulate use of the Penobscot River, and that the Penobscot 
Nation reservation does not include any portion of the river. 
DOI intervened in the Penobscot Nation's lawsuit in sup-
port of the Penobscot Nation. Even if the entire Main Stem 
does not fall within the bounds of the Nation's reservation, 
NR&E Fall 2016 

DOI additionally argued that the boundaries of the Penob-
scot reservation would extend to the threads of the channels 
surrounding the Penobscot Nation's reservation islands. 
According to DOI, these "riparian rights" around the islands of 
the Main Stem create "halos" of water into which the reserva-
tion extends. 
Because the Penobscot Nation's litigation efforts are funded 
by federal dollars, taxpayers are paying the bill for all sides in 
this litigation-the tribe's lawyers and experts, the DOI's law-
yers and experts, and lawyers and experts representing the state. 
A coalition of towns and businesses that hold NPDES waste 
discharge licenses authorizing wastewater discharges into the 
Penobscot River or its branches and tributaries also intervened 
to support of the state's position. This coalition was moti-
vated by concern that if the court agreed with the Penobscot 
Nation that its reservation includes any portion of the Penob-
scot River, and if EPA then grants TAS to the Penobscot 
Nation, then all discharges into the Main Stem will be subject 
to Penobscot Nation water quality standards. The tribal-DOI 
suit also could also rewrite the territorial borders for some 
municipalities. 
In December 2015, after three years and voluminous dis-
covery, including testimony from history professors purporting 
to identify what tribal members were thinking when they 
entered into treaties in 1796 and 1818, district court Judge 
Singal issued his decision in the Penobscot Nation v. Mills law-
suit, holding that the Penobscot Nation reservation does not 
include any portion of the Penobscot River, only the islands 
themselves. Penobscot Nation v. Mills, 1:12-CV-254-GZS, 2015 
WL 9165881 (D. Me. Dec. 16, 2015). The basis for this ruling 
was the plain language of the Settlement Acts, although the 
court also found that legislative history supports this reading. 
The relevant language in the Settlement Acts defines the 
"Penobscot Indian Reservation" as certain "lands," and, more 
specifically, "the islands in the Penobscot River reserved to the 
Penobscot Nation by agreement with the states of Massachu-
setts and Maine consisting solely of Indian Island, also known 
as Old Town Island, and all islands in that river northward 
thereof that existed on June 29, 1818." 30 M.R.S. § 6203(8). 
This language, the court held, "plainly defines the Penob-
scot Indian Reservation as the islands in the Main Stem," and 
"is explicitly silent on the issue of any waters being included 
within the boundaries of the Penobscot Indian Reservation." 
Mills, 2015 WL 9165881, at *28. The court stated: 
In short, the Court concludes that the plain language of 
the Settlement Acts is not ambiguous. The Settlement 
Acts clearly define the Penobscot Indian Reservation 
to include the delineated islands of the Main Stem, but 
do not suggest that any of the waters of the Main Stem 
fall within the Penobscot Indian Reservation. That 
clear statutory language provides no opportunity to sug-
gest that any of the waters of the Main Stem are also 
included within the boundaries of the Penobscot Indian 
Reservation. 
Id. at *29. In other words, "islands" means islands. 
Judge Singal then turned to the question of whether Penob-
scot Nation members have a right to sustenance fish in the 
river, given the Settlement Acts' limitation of the tribal 
NR&E Fall 2016 
sustenance fishing right to "within the boundaries of their 
respective Indian reservations." While the state had never 
restricted the tribe's sustenance fishing activities anywhere 
on the Penobscot River, the plaintiffs had sought a declara-
tory judgment on the issue. Noting that the long-standing and 
accepted practice by all parties was that Penobscot Nation 
members have the right of sustenance fishing on the river, the 
court concluded that language limiting the sustenance fishing 
right to the reservation was ambiguous, given the introductory 
language in the Settlement Acts' definitions section, which 
states that those definitions apply "unless the context indicates 
otherwise." 30 M.R.S. § 6203. 
In December 2015, after 
three years and voluminous 
discovery, district court Judge 
Singal issued his decision 
in the Penobscot Nation v. 
Mills lawsuit, holding that the 
Penobscot Nation reservation 
does not include any portion of 
the Penobscot River, only the 
islands themselves. 
In sum, the court ruled that the reservation itself consists of 
the islands alone, but tribal members may sustenance fish in the 
river waters (which the state never contested). With respect to 
the Penobscot Nation's efforts to regulate water quality, while 
Judge Singal wrote that he was "not resolving the right to reg-
ulate water sampling or the right to regulate discharges by 
towns or non-tribal entities that currently discharge into the 
Penobscot River," as a practical matter, his decision effectively 
resolves that issue by ruling that the Penobscot reservation does 
not include any portion of the river. Mills, 2015 WL 9165881, 
at *26. The Penobscot Nation cannot regulate nontribal dis-
charges to the river, or other activities in and on the river, 
because, in the wake of the Penobscot Nation v. Mills decision, 
the Penobscot Nation does not have any waters within its juris-
diction where its water quality standards might apply. 
DOI and the Penobscot Nation filed post-judgment 
motions to amend the court's order, pursuing the DOI's "halo 
argument." These motions were summarily denied the day 
after DOI and the Penobscot Nation filed their reply briefs. All 
parties have since filed appeals to the United States Court of 
Appeals for the First Circuit in Boston. 
Given that EPA has supported the Penobscot Nation's 
efforts to expand the scope of its environmental regulatory 
authority, it seems likely EPA will continue to hold in abeyance 
the Penobscot Nation's pending TAS application until a final, 
unappealable resolution is reached in Penobscot Nation v. Mills. 
27 

EPA Disapproval of Certain State Water 
Quality Standards 
While the ruling in Maine v. Johnson would appear definitive, 
EPA nevertheless refused to approve Maine's water quality 
standards for any waters within Indian Territory, instead simply 
refusing to take any action on those standards. 
Finally, seven years after the decision in Maine v. Johnson, 
the state brought suit against EPA in 2014 to force EPA's hand. 
See Maine v. McCarthy, Civ. No. 1:14-cv-00264 (D. Me. filed 
July 7, 2014 ). In letters issued in February, March, and June 
2015, EPA conceded that Maine has authority to establish 
water quality standards for tribal lands. EPA nevertheless dis-
approved some of Maine's human health criteria (HHC), now 
asserting that they are not sufficiently protective of tribal sus-
tenance fishing. EPA told Maine that the state must rewrite 
those water quality standards, dating from 2004 to 2013, for 
"waters in Indian lands," to ensure that those waters are clean 
enough to allow tribal members to continue sustenance fish-
ing. See 81 Fed. Reg. 23239, 23241-2 (Apr. 20, 2016). In its 
2015 disapproval letters, "EPA requested that the state revise 
its water quality standards to address the issues identified in 
the disapprovals ... . EPA disapproved Maine's HHC for toxic 
pollutants based on EPA's conclusion that they do not ade-
quately protect the health of tribal sustenance fishers in waters 
in Indian lands." Id. 
The two categories of Maine 
waters to which EPA's April 20 
proposed rule would apply 
would extend the geographic 
scope of the Indian sustenance 
fishing right well beyond the 
"within their reservations" 
limitation contained in the 
Settlement Acts. 
"Indian lands" is not a term used in the Settlement Acts, 
and EPA did not define "Indian lands" in its decision. Also, 
interestingly, and without explanation, EPA applied its deci-
sion to all four Maine tribes (the Penobscot Nation, the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe, the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indi-
ans, and the Aroostook Band of Micmacs), even though the 
Settlement Acts extend sustenance fishing rights only to the 
Penobscot Nation and the Passamaquoddy Tribe. 
The EPA decision set up two sets of standards, one for 
waters "in Indian lands" (wherever this may be) and another 
for the rest of the state. Contrast this position with the lan-
guage of the Settlement Acts themselves, which provide that 
"all Indians . . . and any lands or other natural resources owned 
28 
by them [or] held in trust for them ... shall be subject to the 
laws of the State ... to the same extent as any other person or 
lands or other natural resources therein." 30 M.R.S. § 6204. 
"Land or other natural resources" means "any real property or 
other natural resources ... , including, but without limitation 
. .. water and water rights and hunting and fishing rights." 30 
M.R.S. § 6203(3). 
Notably, EPA had already approved Maine's human HHC 
for all non-Indians, concluding that they are sufficiently pro-
tective of human health. In fact, Maine's criteria are at least as 
stringent as HHC in other states, and when the Maine Depart-
ment of Environmental Protection adopted its HHC, it made 
those criteria more stringent in recognition of the fact that 
some Indians may engage in sustenance fishing. For that rea-
son, Maine increased its assumed fish consumption rate to 32.4 
grams per day (gpd), which is a higher fish consumption rate 
than most states use (17.5 gpd), and Maine uses a risk level 
of 10·6, which is ten times more protective than the risk level 
used in many states (10·5). These two considerations mean that 
Maine's waste discharge limits are among the most stringent in 
the country. 
In the wake of EPA's decision, Maine amended its pending 
Maine v. McCarthy lawsuit against EPA, asking the court to 
set aside EPA's disapproval of Maine's water quality standards 
and to declare that all of Maine's water quality standards that 
EPA approved for non-Indian waters are also required to be 
approved for Indian waters. That case is still pending. 
On April 20, EPA went further, proposing federal HHC 
that would apply to certain waters in Maine in place of the 
Maine standards EPA disapproved in February 2015. 81 Fed. 
Reg. 23239 (Apr. 20, 2016). Aside from proposing the most 
conservative risk assessment factors possible, EPA did not 
clearly define the geographic scope of its rule. Support docu-
ments accompanying the proposed rule noted that the rule 
would apply to (1) "waters in Indian lands," which include 
waters within or adjacent to the boundaries of Indian reserva-
tions or Indian trust lands, and (2) waters outside Indian lands 
where the designated use of sustenance fishing may apply, 
based on Judge Singal's Penobscot Nation v. Mills ruling. Taken 
together, these two categories would extend the geographic 
scope of the Indian sustenance fishing right well beyond the 
"within their reservations" limitation contained in the Settle-
ment Acts. 
No End in Sight? 
It may be appropriate to amend the Settlement Acts if that is 
what elected officials want, understanding the ramifications 
relating to Maine's economy, and if they do so clearly in legisla-
tion. But costly, continual, federally funded litigation is not the 
appropriate forum for this debate. Similarly, unless or until the 
Settlement Acts are amended, federal agencies should follow 
the terms of the settlement, should not enter into secret agree-
ments to thwart transparency, and should not fund efforts to 
undermine a state's sovereign rights as established by Congress. 
Hope springs eternal. Perhaps the court's decision in 
Penobscot Nation v. Mills will at least help to bring finality 
and closure. This matter was settled 35 years ago. At some 
point litigation should cease, and the federal executive branch 
should comply. ~ 
NR&E Fall 2016 

 
 
 
Exhibit B 
 
 

MAINE'S 1997 LETTER 
)., 
ANDRE\V KETTERER 
ATIDRNEY GCNERAL 
Telephone: (207) 626-SBm 
FAX: (207) 287-3145 
TDD: (207) 62&8865 
STATE OF MAINE 
DEPARTMENT OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL 
6 STATE HOUSE STATION 
AUGUSTA, MAINE 04333-0006 
June 3, 1997 
John DeVillars 
Regional Administrator 
Region I 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
J.F.K. Federal Building 
Boston, MA 02203 
Re: 
Lincoln Pulp & Paper NPDES No. ME0002003 Appeal 
Dear Mr. DeVillars: 
REGIONAL Or-FICES: 
84 HARLOW ST., 2ND FLOOR 
BANGOR, MAINE 0440) 
TEL: (207) 941-3070 
FAx: (207) 941-3075 
59 PREBLE STREET 
PORTLAND, MA~E 04101-3014 
TEL: (207) 822-0260 
FAX: (207) 822-0259 
On April 3, 1997, we submitted a short letter to you relating our concern over 
the positions taken by the Penobscot Indian Nation in its petition for appeal dated 
February 28, 1997, of the NPDES permit for the Lincoln Pulp & Paper plant in 
Lincoln, Maine. By letter dated May 1, 1997, the Penobscot Indian Nation clarified its 
position in response to a request by the EPA. This May 1 letter made clear that the 
Penobscot Indian Nation sought to have an evidentiary hearing regarding; inter 
alia, the true "nature and extent of the [Nation's] fishing rights," arguing that such 
"rights" were somehow violated by the EPA's actions. 
Because the Nation.proffers arguments and theories that, if accepted, would 
do serious damage to the legal relationship between the Penobscot Nation and the 
State of Maine, we are compelled to address them in detail. This letter will no\ 
address all issues raised in the appeal but, rather, will focus on the Penobscot 
Nation's contention that their members' fishing rights allow them to 
effectively regulate a large portion of the State of Maine outside the Penobscot 
reservation - a result at odds with the Federal Maine Indian Claim Settlement Act, 
25 U.S.C. §§ 1721-35, the Maine le.gislation implementing the Indian Claim 
Settlement Act, 30 M.RS.A. §§ 6201-14, and the Clean Water Act. 
DISCUSSION 
As noted above, this filing will not attempt to counter all of the arguments 
presented by the Penobscot Indian Nation. Rather, we will limit our discussion to 
assertions of the Penobscot Indian Nation that they possess "sustenance" fishing 

-2-
rights requiring the State and EPA to guarantee a particular type of fishery in the 
Penobscot River, and that general Indian common law provides the Penobscots with 
some special status with respect to the EPA. As discussed in. more detail below, the 
Settlement Acts do not guarantee a particular quality or quantity of fish, and do not 
delegate to the Nation the jurisdiction to control the resources of the State of Maine; 
and whatever general relationship EPA may have with other Indian tribes, the 
Settlement Acts define its relationship with the tribes in Main.e. For these reasons, 
the EPA should reject the Penobscot Indian Nation's legal assertions and should 
deny their request to have an evidentiary hearing. Applicable legislation already 
prescribes the relationship between the Penobscot Nation, the federal government 
and the State of Maine - an evidentiary hearing on that relationship is wholly . 
irrelevant. 
We wish to make clear that the members.of the Penobscot Indian Nation 
have the same rights and standing as all other citizens of Maine to challenge the 
actions of the EPA and the State of Maine regarding water quality. The members, 
however, have no greater rights because of their status as Penobscots - i.e., the 
Penobscots have no additional or different claims based solely upon their being 
members of the Nation. 
· 
BACKGROUND 
To correctly evaluate the issues raised, it is critical to understand the nature, 
purpose and effect of the Settlement Acts - the Federal Maine Indian Land Claim 
Settlement Act, 25 U.S.C. §§ 1721-35, and the Maine Indian Claim Settlement Act, 
30 M.RS.A. §§ 6201-14. It is well established that tribal rights are subject to the 
plenary authority of Congress to delimit the sovereignty and rights of a tribe. See 
Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez, 436 U.S. 49, 56, 98 S.Ct. 1670, 1676 (1978). The tribe 
no longer possesses the full attributes of sovereignty, and tribal sovereignty "exists 
only at the sufferance of Congress and is subject to complete defeasance." Id.; United 
States v. Wheeler, 435 U.S. 313, 323, 98 S. Ct. 1074, 1086 (1978). Tribal sovereignty 
may be eliminated by treaty, statute or necessary implication. Id. Moreover, a ti;ibe's 
attributes of sovereignty, to the extent they exist, do not negate the fact that its 
reservation is part of a state. Chemehuevi Indian Tribe v. California State Board, 
800 F.2d 1446, 1450 (9th Cir. 1986). 
. 
In the 1970's, the Secretary of the Interior on behalf of the Passamaquoddy 
Tribe and Penobscot Indian Nation pursued claims in court to nearly two-thirds of 
Maine's land mass. See Passamaquoddy Tribe v. State of Maine, 75 F.3d 784, 787 
(1st Cir. 1996). The Federal government, the Penobscot Indian Nation and the State 
negotiated a settlement of the land claims and the jurisdictional issues. This 
settlement and the legislation memorializing it were designed "to create a unique. 
relationship between State and Tribal authority." Id. This settlement was 

-3-
specifically agreed to and approved by the Penobscot Indian Nation. 25 U.S.C. 
§1721(a)(8); 30 M.RS.A. §6202; S. Rep. No. 96-957, 96th Cong., 2d Sess. 13 (1980). 
The Settlement Acts "rid the State of all Indian land claims and submitted ... 
the Penobscots[] and their tribal lands to the State's jurisdiction[, and] .. , gave the . 
State a measure of security against future federal incursions upon these hard-won 
gains." Passamaquoddy Tribe v. State of Maine, 75 F.3d at 787. According to the 
Penobscot Indian Nation's own counsel, the relationship established by the Federal 
and State Acts is "unlike that which exists anywhere else in the United States."1 
The Federal and State Acts set the framework that would "govern matters of 
common political concern to the State and" the Penobscot Indian Nation. Id. 
It was generally agreed that·the acts set up a relation5hip 
between the tribes, the state, and the federal government 
different from the relationship of Indians in other states 
to the state and the federal governments .... 
We, therefore, look not to federal common law ... but to 
the statute itself and its legislative history. 
·Penobscot Nation v. Stilphen, 461 A.2d 478, 489 (Me. 1983)(emphasis added). The 
settlement acts prescribe that the members of the Penobscot Nation are to be treated 
exactly the same as any other person, except as otherwise prescribed in the State Act .. 
. 30 M.RS.A. § 6204. There is nothing in the State or Federal Act that supports the 
far-reaching rights the Penobscots now appear to claim. 
THE PENOBSCOT INDIAN NATION DOES NOT HA VE 
UNLIMITED FISHING RIGHfS AND DOES NOT 
·OWN THE PENOBSCOT RIVER 
Perhaps the most troubling aspect of the theories tendered by the Penobscot 
Indian Nation in its present petition is the notion that the claimed right to 
. 
"sustenance" fishing within· its reservation, under the Settlement Acts, should be 
read to dictate the environmental standards, laws and regulations for the State. The 
Penobscot Indian Nation's present claim demands a guarantee to a quantity of fish 
beyond that which currently exists and of a quality that the Penobscots have special 
rights to choose, and a requirement that the EPA and the State of Maine do 
. whatever the Penobscot Indian Nation believes is appropriate to create "their" 
1 
Transcript of March 28, 1980 Public Hearing before the Joint SelectCommlttee on Indian 
· Land Oaims, 25, quoted in Penobscot Nation v. Slilp/ien, 461A.2d478, 488 (Me. 1983). Said counsel · 
further noted that the settlement expanded the State's jurisdiction over the tribe from what he 
conceived it previously to be. Id. at 23-24, quoted in Penobscot Nation v. Stilp/1en, 461 A.2d at 488 n. 7. 

-4-
fish - regardless of the impact on the rest of the State.2 This argument runs counter 
to the language of and the history behind the Settlement Acts, and does damage to 
the relationship carefully crafted therein between the Penobscot Indian Nation and 
the Federal and State governments. The Penobscot Indian Nation tenders two bases 
for their theory: that members of the Penobscot Indian Nation have unlimited 
fishing rights; and the Penobscot Indian Nation somehow reserved the Penobscot 
River. 
The Penobscot Indian Nation's Fishing Rights Are Not Unlimited. 
The cornerstone of the Penobscot Indian Nation's argument is that it 
reserved or was granted "sustenance" fishing rights which constitute a guarantee of 
a special quality and quantity of fish for them as Penobscots. No such guarantee 
appears in the Settlement Acts, prior treaties, or history of the Penobscot Indian 
Nation. 
At the time of the Settlement Acts in 1980, the type of "sustenance" fishing 
the Nation now lays claim to did not exist. Indeed, they do not and cannot suggest 
that the fishery in 1980 - or for any appreciable time prior thereto - was sufficient to 
allow the members of the Penobscot Tribe to live off their catch.3 ·Further, the 
EPA can - and should - take administrative notice that, in 1980, when the 
settlement was negotiated and confirmed, clearly the Penobscot River and the fish . 
therein were less "clean" - i.e., more polluted - than today. In 1980, obviously the 
fish were fewer and more "contaminated." 
In the face of this, the notion that in 1980 Congress and the State of Maine 
specifically guaranteed to each member of the Penobscot Na.tion a sufficient quantity 
and quality of fish to live upon is untenable. In.1980, the members of the Nation 
did not live off of - did not sustain themselves from - the fish. There is nothing in 
the treaties, laws or history that supports a conclusion that in 1980 the State and 
Congress intended to create a fish resource in the Penobscot River that did not exist. 
The Penobscot Nation relies upon the following provision in the State Act: 
Notwithstanding any rule or regulation promulgated by 
the commission or any other law of the States, the 
members of ... the Penobscot Nation may take fish 
2 
To reiterate, the Penobscots may tender any argument regarding quantity or quality 
that any Maine citizen can proffer. 
3 
In 1980, only 810 salmon were caught by anyone on the Penobscot River. Baum, Atlantic 
Salmon Restoration Program, Progress Report 1969-1985, App. D (1988). In 1980, the total salmon run for 
that river was 3,277. Id at App. C. · 

-5-
within the boundaries of their ... reservation[ ], for their 
individual sustenance subject to the limitations of 
[30 M.R.S.A. § 6207(6)]. 
30 M.RS.A. § 6207(4). Section 6207(6) empowers the Commissioner of Inland 
Fisheries and Wildlife to limit the Nation's fishing if, in his opinion, tribal fishing 
is harming the resource. The Nation would have EPA construe this provision to 
constitute a guarantee of unlimited, virgin fish - unaffected by modern industrial 
society-: to "sustain" each and every member of the tribe. However, there is 
nothing in the Acts wherein the State or Congress promised to enhance 
dramatically or even marginally the .fishery, nor give the Penobscot Indian Nation a 
right to higher quality fish than any other Maine citizen. 
The first portion of section 6207(4) makes clear that the members of the 
Nation may take fish regardless of the normally applicable State restrictions on 
quantity, size and season: 
Notwithstanding any rule ... of the state, the members of 
... the Penobscot Nation may take fish within the 
boundaries of their reservation[ ] ... 
In other words, if the otherwise applicable State laws allow fishing only in January, 
the Penobscots may fish within their reservation in Maine from February through 
December as well. There is no guarantee of a special quantity or quality of fish for 
the Penobscots. 
During legislative hearings, a question arose over whether tJ:tls exemption 
was intended to apply to commercial as well as personal fishing. The second 
portion of section 6207(4) clarifies the issue by limiting the exception from State law 
only 
... for their individual sustenance ... · 
to make clear the exemption was not.for "commercial" purposes.4 The word 
"sustenance," thus, was a limitation on the exemption from State fishing 
4 
As noted at.the State legislative hearings on the proposed Settlement Act: 
We didn't just use the word sustenance, we used sustenance for 
the individual which we construe as .not covering commercial 
fishing operations. We believe that means consumption by the 
indiv'idual. 
Maine Legislative Joint Select Committee on Maine Indian Claims Settlement, Transcript of 
. Public Hearing at 164-65 (March 28, 1980). 
· 

- 6 -
regulations for tribal members fishing within the reservation - with no indication, 
implication, or intent that it constituted a guarantee of numbers or quality of fish. 
This conclusion is fully supported by applicable case law. Even where 
"susten1mce" fishing rights are recognized, the courts have rejected the notion that . 
tribes have some sort of special right to require the protection of fishing habitats 
from environmental degradation. Menominee Indian Tribe of Wisconsin v. 
Thompson, 922 F.Supp. 184, 215-16 (VV.D. Wis. 1996). Thus, not only do the history 
and language of the Settlement Acts fail to support the guarantee the Penobscot 
Indian Nation now proclaims, but such a guarantee finds no place in federal case 
law. 
The contrary conclusion is both unworkable and unenforceable. What 
would that special fishery be? What types of fish? How many? What size? What 
special quality? None of these issues are alluded to in the Settlement Acts, and the 
answer to each raises matters beyond the authority or discretion of the EPA. But 
that is exactly what the Penobscot Nation appears to seek: an evidentiary hearing to 
create a fishery that has not existed for generations. There is nothing in the law 
supporting such a right. 
To accept the Penobscot Nation's argument is to conjure up an affirmative 
obligation on the part of the EPA and the State to enhance and create a fishery for 
the Penobscots that did not exist in 1980, and for that matter generations 
theretofore. Discharge of untreated and municipal waste into the Penobscot River 
and use of the river for log drives caused severe deterioration in water quality -
and therefore the fishery - from at least the start of the century until the 1970's. 
Draft EIS, Milford Dam, 3-7 (FERC 1994). The extensive damming of the river in 
the 1800's and early 1900's effectively altered the river environment and fishery. Id., 
at 3-1, 3-19. In the face of this, there is nothing in the Settlement Acts which even 
hints at the notion that "s.ustenance" fishing contemplated anything more than 
allowing members of the Penobscot Nation to fish for whatever fish were available 
for their personal - not commercial - purposes. There is no obligation found in 
the Settlement Acts requiring the federal government or the State to create a new 
fishery. 
The Penobscot Nation Does Not "Own" The River. 
The Penobscot Nation also suggests it "owns" the River. The stated purpose 
of the Federal Act is 
(1) to remove the cloud on the titles to land in the State of 
Maine resulting from Indian claims; 

-7-
(2) to clarify the status of other land and natural resources 
in the State of Maine; 
(3) to ratify the Maine Implementing Act, which defines 
the relationship between the State of Maine and the ... 
Penobscot Nation .... 
25 U.S.C. § 1721(B)). Congress defined "land and natural resources" to include not 
only real property but also "water and water rights, and hunting and fishing rights." 
25 U.S.C. §1722(b ). Congress ratified. and approved all prior "transfers" of land and 
natural resources, which by definition included any fishing rights, including, 
without limitation, transfers pursuant "to any treaty, compact or statute of any 
State." 25 U.S.C. §1723(1). "Transfer" was broadly defined to encompass all forms ·of 
"voluntary or involuntary sale, grant, tease, allotment, partition or other 
conveyance," including "any transaction the purpose of which was to effect" a 
conveyances as well as "any act, event, or circumstance the resulted in a change to 
title to, possession of, dominion over, or control of land or natural resources." 
25 U.S.C. §1722(n). Congress specifically extinguished any aboriginal claims in or to 
such natural resources (25 U.S.C. §1723(b)), and made clear that 
The ... Penobscot Indian Nation and [its] members, and 
the land and natural resotirces owned by, or held in trust 
for the benefit of the Tribe, Nation or their members, 
shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the State of Maine to 
the extent and the same manner provided in the Maine 
Implementing Act and that Act is hereby approved, 
ratified and confirmed. 
25 U.S.C. § 172!)(b)(l). The Maine Act rendered the Nation fully subject to Maine 
regulation and law. 30 M.RS.A. ·§ 6204. Thus, Congress specifically Validated all 
prior acts which had the effect of placing any ownership of or control over the river 
out of the hands of the Penobscot Indian Nation, as well as made the resources the 
Nation did own fully subject to Main_e law. 
· 
The Penobscot Indian Nation suggests that the 1796 and 1818 treaties between 
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the Penobscot Indian Nation somehow 
resulted in the latter owning the Penobscot River and, apparently, everything 
therein. First, we note that. such an assertion is largely irrelevant. There is little 
doubt under the present state of the law, the Federal government and the State can 
and do regulate "resources" whatever they may be - land, water, trees, crops -
regardless of ownership and sometimes at odds with the preferences of owners. 
Certainly, the "owners" may complain that the regulation is inappropriate but may 
not dictate the outcome by merely claiming ownership. (li the contrary were true, 

-8-
there would be no EPA.) In any case, there is nothing in the treaties reserving or 
granting such broad rights to the Penobscot Indian Nation. 
In the 1796 treaty [a typewritten version is attached hereto as Exhibit A], the 
Penobscot Inctian Nation relinquished title to· all lands along both sides of the 
Penobscot River for a 30 mile stretch north of Old town, specifically reserving only 
"all the Islands" therein. There is no reservation of the River or any of its 
resources. In Massachusetts, and thereafter Maine, the owner of the land along a 
navigable river owned the land beneath the river but not the river itself .. Bradley 
v. Rice, 13 Me. 198, 201 (1836). The "State represents all public rights and privileges 
in our fresh water rivers and streams, and may dispose of the same as it sees fit." 
Mullen v. Penobscot Log Driving Co., 90 Me. 555, 567 (1897). The right of the public 
to regulate interior fisheries was well-established in Massachusetts, and 
subsequently in Maine. Cottrill v. Myrick, 12 Me. 441, 459:60 (1835), There is 
nothing in the 1796 Treaty in any way suggesting otherwise. 
Reliance on the 1818 Treaty is also misplaced. The Penobscot Indian Nation 
suggests that a particular phrase in the Treaty somehow implies the Nation 
reserved broad fishing rights. Penobscot Indian Nation Br., at 4. In this treaty, the. 
Nation conveyed 
the tribe's rights, title, interest and estate in and to all the 
lands they claims, occupy and possess by any means 
whatever on both sides of the Penobscot River, and the 
branches thereof , .. excepting and reserving from this sale 
and conveyance ... four townships of land of six miies 
square each ... 
(A c0py is attached as Exhibit B.) Thus, the Nation conveyed all its interest, except 
four specific townships which bordered the river or its branches. 
At the end of the 
Treaty, it reads: 
And it is further agreed by and on the part of said tribe, 
that the said commonwealth shall have a right at all times 
hereafter to make and keep open all necessary roads, 
through any lands hereby reserved for the future use of 
said tribe. And that the citizens of said Commonwealth 
shall have a right to pass and repass any of the rivers, 
streams, and ponds, which runs through any of the lands 
hereby reserved; for the purpose of transporting their 
timber and other articles through the same. 
(Emphasis added.) The Nation suggests that the specific reference to the "passing 
and repassing" on waterways implies that the Penobscot Indian Nation retained 

-9-
ownership of the river, the water and the fish. First, at most it speaks to only the 
four reserved townships. It does not purport to effect the entire Penobscot River or 
its watershed. Moreover, in 1833, the Penobscot Nation did 
cede, grant, bargain, sell and convey to said State, all the 
right, title and interest of said Tribe in and to their four 
townships ... 
To have and to hold to said State the above granted 
premises with all the privileges and appurtenances there 
unto belonging forever. 
[A]nd that we for ourselves and in behalf of said Tribe will 
forever covenant and defend the premises against the 
claims of all the members of.said tribe. 
Deed of June 10, 1833 (Exhibit C hereto). Thus, the Nation conveyed away all lands 
and any privileges relating thereto upon which any claim could be based. To the 
extent the Penobscot Nation suggests the 1818 Treaty reserved some sort of rights in 
or to the Penobscot River, the 1833 deed conveyed those to the State. These transfers 
were ratified and approved by Congress. 25 U.S.C. § 1722(n) & 1723(i).S 
The Penobscot Indian Nation's ownership of islands in the main stem of the 
Penobscot River does not change the result. Prior to the final adoption of the 
settlement in 1980, it was made clear that: 
The tribes will not own the bed of any Great Pond or any 
waters of a Great Pond or river or stream, all of which are 
owned by the State of Maine in trust for all citizens. 
Memorandum dated April. 1, 1980, from Richard S. Cohen, Attorney General, to 
Joint Select Committee on Indian Land Claims, at 3. Moreover, as noted by the 
Joint Select Committee on Indian Land Claims: 
5 
As an aside, the Commonwealth was seeking to make clear to the Nation in 1818 that 
ownership along waterways would not allow it to impede traffic thereon, and to ensure use of smaller · 
. waterways not normally open to the public. In Maine and Massachusetts, there is a distinction between 
navigable and "nonnavigable" rivers and streams. The former may be used by the public "to pass and 
re pass," while the latter normally cannot. Pearson v. Rolfe, 76 Me. 380 (1884). In addition, great ponds 
[being ponds greater than 10 acres in size] are generally open to public use, but smaller ponds are not. 
Thus, put in context, it becomes clear that In the 1818 Treaty, the Commonwealth was ensuring 
transportation - not only over all potential roads but also all waterways -- whether or not the public 
normally roight have such a right. This language, thus, does not imply a reservation of broad rights to 
the Penobscots but rather preserves the public's ability to pass and repass over "nonnavigable" 
waterways and non-great p·onds where the Nation might otherwise block them. 

-10-
The jurisdictional provisions relating to fish and wildlife 
use the term "side of a river or stream" which means the 
mainland shore and not the shoreline of an island. 
Report of Maine Joint Select Committee on Indian Land Claims, at 2. Finally, the 
definition of the Penobscot Indian Reservation does not include the river -- only 
the islands in the main stem. 30 M.R.S.A. § 6203(8). Although there may be a 
certain portion of the river bed that goes along' with the ownership of an island in 
the river, as noted above ownership of a portion of the bed does not constitute 
ownership of the "river" and certainly does not amount to a guarantee of a special 
quality or quantity of fish therein. 
TIIE PENOBSCOT INDIAN NATION HAS NO SPECIAL 
STANDING IN THESE PROCEEDINGS. 
Throughout their filings, the Penobscot Indian Nation suggests it possesses 
some special status, requiring EPA to abide by its wishes because of a "trust" 
relationship. Neither the Settlement Acts nor the Clean Water Act support such an 
assertion. 
The EPA Has No Special Relationship With the Penobscot Indian Nation. 
The structure of the settlement, as set out in the Federal and State Acts, 
. clearly argues against the claim to a "special" right to have EPA do the Nation's 
bidding. The Penobscot Indian Nation relies heavily upon notions of general 
Indfan commofflaw for the proposition that EPA is the trustee of the Penobscot 
Indian Nation's asserted fishing rights to the exclusion of the State's regulatory 
authority. However, the settlement dealt with the Maine Indians in a manner 
"unlike that which.exists anywhere else in the United States." Comments of the 
Nation's Counsel, quoted.in Penobscot Nation v. Stilphen, 461 A.2d at 488. Thus, 
in dealing with the Penobscot Indian Nation, we look not to federal common law 
but to the statutes themselves. Id. at 489. The caselaw referred to by the Penobscot 
Indian Nation regarding EPA's responsibilities elsewhere is, therefore, irrelevant.6 
6 
We note further that the caselaw relied upon by Penobscot Indian Nation is 
mischaracterized. For example, In the unreported case of Klamath Tribes ti· United States, No. 96-381-
HA (D. Ore. Oct. 2, 1996), referred to at page 25 of the Nation's brief, the U.S. Forest Service 
acknowledged Its trust obligations in view of the clear and unambiguous language in the treaty with 
that tribe. The lesson from Klamath Tribes Is that we must look closely at the exact relationship 
· 
created by Congress - and not blindly apply case law based upon. different treaties and different 
statutes relating to different tribes. 
· 

-11-
It is the Federal and State Acts that establish the relationship between the 
Penobscot Indian Nation, the federal government and the State of Maine.7 
Congress made clear that federal regulations and statutes generally applicable to 
Indians would not apply in Maine: 
[N]o law or regulation of the United States (1) which 
accords or relates to a special status or right of or to any 
Indian, Indian nation, tribe or band of Indians, Indian 
lands, Indian reservations, Indian coµntry, Indian 
territory or land held in trust for Indians and also (2) 
which affects or preempts the civil, criminal, or regulatory 
jurisdiction of the State of Maine, including, without 
limitation, laws of the Stat~ relating to land use or 
environmental matters, shall· apply within the State. 
25 U.S.C. § 1725(h) (emphasis added). Further, Congress went on to provide that 
The provisions of any Federal law enacted after 
October 10, 1980, for the benefit of Indians, Indian nations, 
or tribes or bands of Indians, which would affect or · 
preempt the application of the laws of the State of Maine, 
including application of the laws of the State to lands 
owned by or held in trust for Indians, or Indian nations, 
tribes, or bands of Indians, as provided in this subchapter 
and the Maine Implementing Act, shall not apply within 
the State of Maine, unless such provision of such 
subsequently enacted Federal law is specifically made 
applicable within the State of Maine. 
Thus, general Federal Indian law existing in 1980 or enacted thereafter does not 
benefit the Penobscot Indian Nation. 
These provisions were designed to implement a crucial premise of the 
settlement from the State's point of view - the principle that, except as specifically 
provided in the Act, Maine Indians and Indian lands shall be subject to the laws of 
the State "to.the same extent as any other person or lands .... " 30 M.RS.A. § 6204. 
This principle was specifically "approved, ratified, and confirmed" by Congress. 
7 
Transcript of March 28, 1980 Public Hearing before the Joint Select Committee on Indian 
Land Claims, 25, quoted in Penobscot Nation v. Stilphen, 461 A.2d 478, 488 (Me. 1983). 

-12-
25 U.S.C. § 1725(b)(l).8 These provisions are consistent with the statement by the 
attorney for the tribes at the time of settlement that federal Indian law was excluded 
in Maine "in part because that was the position the State held to in the negotiations 
.... [and] it is also true to say that the tribes are concerned about the problems that 
existed in the West because of the pervasive interference and involvement of the 
federal government in internal tribal matters." Hearings before the Senate 
Committee on Indian Affairs on S.2829, 96th Cong. 2d Sess. 181--82 (1980). 
These statutes are designed to protect against any incursion upon Maine's law 
by federal law which might otherwise give a special status to either Indians or 
Indian lands. "Laws" include not only statutes but "common law." See Penobscot 
Nation v. Stilphen, 461 A.2d 489;. 25 U.S.C. §1722(d)(defining "laws" of the State to 
include common law). 
A "complex statutory and regulatory scheme ... governs our Nation's waters, 
a scheme which implicates both federal and state administrative responsibilities." 
PUD No. 1 v. Washington Dept. of Ecology, 511 U.S. 700, 704 (1994). Generally, the 
states and EPA share duties in achieving the goals of the Clean Water Act but the 
primary responsibility for establishing water quality standards is left to the states. 
33 U.S.C. § 1251(b); NRDC v. U.S.E.P.A., 16 F.3d 1395, 1399 (4th Cir: 1993). EPA 
reviews the state-implemented standards, with approval and rejection power. 
33 U.S.C. § 1313(c). The .States must establish narrative or numerical criteria for 
various .pollutants, including dioxin. Id. Permits to individual facilities under the 
NPDES program must be protective of these standards. 33 U.S.C. § 1311(b) & (c). 
These permits are issued by the EPA or by states that have been delegated NPDES · 
permitting authority. 33 U.S.C. § 1342. In Maine, this authority has not been 
delegated to the State. However, the EP A's action still must be approved by Maine 
certifying pursuant to section 401, that the discharge will comply with Maine water 
standards. PUD No. 1 v. Washington Dept. of Ecology, 511 U.S. at 1907. 
Nothing in these provisions specifically provides a role for Maine tribes. 
Indeed, EPA itself has. noted: 
[The provisions of the 1980 Federal Act] seem to 
invalidate federal laws that might give the Penobscots 
special status ... if it would "affect or preempt" the state's 
authority, including the state's jurisdiction over 
environmental and land use matters. 
8 
As the Maine Supreme Judicial Court noted in Penobscot Nation v. SJUphen, 461 A.2d 
478, 488-89 n.7 (Me. 1983), appeal dismissed for want of a substantial federal question, 464 U.S. 923 
(1983), the attorney for the tribes at the time of settlement acknowledged that the subjection of the 
tribes to state jurisdiction was the essential quid pro quo which the tribes had to offer to obtain the 
State's agreement to a settlement. 
· 

-13 -
[A]ny post~1980 special federal legislative provisions that 
might give Indians special jurisdictional authority ... 
could not provide the Penobscots with such jurisdictional 
authority unless the federal legislation specifically 
addressed Maine and made the legislation applicable 
within Maine. 
USEPA Memorandum: Penobscots Treatment as·a State under CWA § 518(e) for 
Purposes of Receiving CW A § 106 Grant, at 8 (July 20, 1993).9 
In 1980, the Senate Committee Report listed the Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. 
§ 7474, as an example of a federal statute which accords special rights to Indian tribes 
and Indian lands but which would nm be appli\:able in Maine because it would 
interfere with the State air quality laws. S.Rep.No. 96-957, 96th Cong., 2d Sess. 31 
(1980). The specific section of the Clean Air Act which the Senate Committee 
Report cites as being inapplicable in Maine, 42 U.S.C. § 7474, is a provision that 
permits tribes to supplant state air quality standards by designating their own air 
quality standards for tribal lands. The Clean Water Act now has a similar 
provision. 
The Water Quality Act of 1987 authorized the EPA to treat an Indian Tribe as 
a state when dealing with water quality standards, limitations, permitting and 
enforcement. 33 U.S.C. §1377(e). However, Congress clearly intended that 
This section does not override the provisions of the Maine 
Indian Claims Settlement Act (25 U.S.C. §1725). Consistent 
with subsection (h) of the Settlement Act, the tribes 
addressed by the Settlement Act are not eligible to be 
treated as States for regulatory purposes ... · 
Section-by-Section Analysis Prepared by the Hon. James J. Howard, Chairman of the 
House Committee on Public Works and Transportation, 2 1987 U.S.C.C.A.N. at 43. 
Obviously, Congress understood that in Maine the tribes receive no special status.10 
9 
Despite identifying this issue, the memorandum went on to conclude that the Penobscots 
could obtain§ 106 grants, without addressing the "preempt or affect" bar. 
10 
More recently, the United States Department of the Interior recognized that the intent 
· of these statutes is "to limit the applicability of provisions of the ... Clean Water Act (CWA) 
provisions (Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1377) ... which accord Indian tribes the 
oppo.rtunity to assume state status or otherwise affect the exercise of state authority .•. " United States 
Department of the Interior's Response to Comments, Bangor Hydro-Electric Co., FERC Project No. 2534, 
at 20 (April 9, 1997). · 

-14-
In addition, a State waste discharge license pursuant to 38 M.R.S.A. §§ 414-A, 
et seq, is required. The Clean Water Act specifically recognizes and validates the 
role of such permits in the regulatory scheme. 33 U.S.C. § 1370; PUD No. 1 v. 
Washington Dept. of Ecologtj, 511 U.S. at 707-08. In this matter, the State issued that 
permit on January 23, 1997. 
The Penobscot Indian Nation has no special status to directly or indirectly 
affect or preempt the role of the State in regulating the Penobscot River. Congress 
could not have been more clear that the Maine tribes have no special status to 
establish water standards nor circumvent the State's role in the § 401 process or its 
State licensing authority. Likewise, the Penobscot Nation cannot be allowed to 
attain a special status not recognized in the Clean Water Act or the Settlement Acts 
which affects the State's jurisdiction to regulate its water resources. The Settlement 
Acts direct that the Penobscot Nation and their _land "or other natural resources" 
[including any alleged fishing rights] are to be treated "to the same extent as any 
other person or lands or other natural resources." 30 M.R.S.A. § 6204. TQ the extent 
the Penobscot Nation seeks a special status for its members under the Clean Water 
Act to affect the regulatory role of the State of Maine, both the Federal and State 
Settlement Acts specifically bar such a result. 
· 
Obviously, the State's regulatory jurisdiction is affected if the State's water 
quality actions and decisions can be rendered irrelevant by new conditions ini.posed 
specially on behalf of the Penobscot Nation. State regulatory jurisdiction 
is "affected" whenever the· federal government changes the State's licenses or 
certification specially on behalf of an Indian tribe. 

-15-
CONCLUSION 
The Penobscot Indian Nation seeks a special status not provided in the 
Settlement Acts, and in fact specifically barred therein. The Nation has no 
guarantee of an quantity and quality of fish other than that of every other citizen of 
the State. Neither the Settlement Acts nor the Clean Water Act contemplate 
allowing the Penobscot Nation to. specially dictate the environmental regulation of 
the Penobscot River. Certainly, the Settlement Acts do not require the EPA to 
amend, vacate or nullify the State's§ 401 certification or waste disCharge license to 
ensure special "unlimited" fishing rights. 
PS:jwp 
Respectfully submitted, 
ANDREW KETTERER 
Attorney General 
PAUL STERN 
Assistant Attorney General 
Attorney for State of Maine 
Attachments 
cc: 
Patti A. Goldman, Esq. 
Kate L. Geoffroy, Esq. ~ 
Timothy L. Williamson, Esq. 
Mary Ann Gavin, Hearing Officer 

Trro.ty CMde by the ~1th 
of ~tts 
with the Pcncbocot Tribe Of InilMS, /\U)U'lt 8, 1796 
~ 
J.rd.enture, ~ 
thi.!S clghth day of "1J]USt in tho year of ou:t" 
lotd ooe ~ 
l!loCVel\ 1-urdro:i Md ninety alx beb.>een. 'Hllll~ Shepard, 
Hath.an Dane Ard ~ 
~, ~. 
O::lmt.i.Miooer:s duly ~inte::l 
arrl fully lld.lth;)rlu:rl an:1 ~ 
bf tho ~th 
of ~tts, 
to treat arrl a~ 
\Ii.th tho Peocbsoot t:d.ba ot IrdLa.M, ~ 
Uurl..5 they cl.al« on ~t 
Rl.Ytt" on ·the tt.e part, an:::l Ororo, Os:sarq, 
Ui~t, Jooepl1. ~. ~t, 
and Sebatili Neph?OG, OUcfs 
ot tho said 'rril>l1 for thcrroelves, ' for tho s:ald 'I'rlbe, Wi~th.. 
EXHIBIT A 
'Ihat the a.aid Cltl.e.fa for them:5elve.1, Mrl f'or thcl.r a.a.id Tribe, in 
oonsldei:atioo of the imnedia.te ard anoo.al paym:nta, he.reina!b!.t" i-:ien.ticoe:i 
~ 
acd &eCl.1rei to therr:l l1J tho said Q:::r:rotlcl~, 00 grant, rel~, 
rel.1ogut.h Md quit cl.Ah> to. the aald ~th. 
their the said Tribes 
ri<ftlt, In~ 
ard claitl. to All t:he lards oo l:oth a.idea of the River 
Pen:booot, begi..Mirq nea.t." O':>l • .Jooathan Ed:fy 1:s ~ 
h:iuse, at Hlchel.'s 
rock, so cal.led, ard ext:en:llng up the said Rivcc" thirty lnlle:i: oo a dii-ect 
llne,-acco:dirq.to the CeocnU COJroo of said River, oo ea.cl\ !!:lde tbereofr 
exo:ptirq .~. Md =vir9 to th> s<ili! trite, all th> x.1.,.ru Jn said 
River, ~ 
old 'I'onu, incll.Xllrq s.a!d old TcMi. Islaoi, vi.thin the u.m.u 
,of ilia s.a.ld. thirty WJ.es. hd the said O::mili41~, for Arrl in ~ 
of 
the :ia1d ~th, 
1n <::00!5.l<let:atiOO. of the rc~t 
a!OU:3a.ld, 00 
<XNeoant:, pnxntse, ~ 
ant erqbgC, that the &aid O:tmorwealth shtll de.live.: 
hero at the C"OJth of ~ 
·River, to tho said Tribe, J.nrreil.ately oo Nd 
a!te.t: thl.!'I I..rden:b..1.re shall 00 signed arrl execute:!, the follo..i.rq articlel;, 
viz. C'ae ~ 
an:i forty nine an:i a hal.f yards of blue cloth for blanket.is, 
fa»: N.rdred ~ 
of W:>t, .c:ire h!Jrrlro:1 p::urds of ~. 
thlrty six hats, 
t:Mrtecn bJ3bel..a or: Salt bairq coe large l~, ~ 
ba.t:rel. of ~ 
Erqlard 
au, am q:10. ~ 
OOshel.e of oxn 1'.t Hajor fti:iert Treats, Ard t:t-e s.tld 
o:mdsst~ do furthe:t: paxndse, llqrOO Md er-q*, fo.C Ard in behalf of 
Ea.id O:rmoo..oea.l.th, that the said ~th 
shall deliver he..t'Mf ter in 
-1-

eadl. am every year, to the said n:ibc of Ird.l..ms, at O(' noar the s.:i.W 
rrouth of said f.eodlJskcag so 1orq .as they shall continue to be a nation 
ard shall live wlthln thi.d ~th, 
the !ollo..rirq articles, viz. 
'ltu:eo ~ 
bushels of 9(XXl In:llan oorn, fifty p;:.iu:rd3 of .pot..der, b.o 
hxdrOO. poun±s of shot, arrl ~ty five y.iu:d.3 of 90'Xl blue cloth for 
Blankeb, ard that the S,M'¢ a.t;Uc!e:s Mall be dellveroi at the ~ 
foll.o..rlrq, vb:. Ole Wo:1red Du3hcl..s of the mrn 00 oc be!orc the first 
day of }1ay anoJ.ally, beq'irclrq co. the first day of Hay next, ard the 
othex: two moored b.J.shcls of oorn, "'1th i:ha said other artic.l.~, en or 
be.fore l:he tenth day of pctx:ber ~y, beginnln; ca tile tenth day of 
~ 
in the ye;:u: of o.n: Locd ooo th::iusa.n:l seven hunirOO and nlnety-
sewn. 
In test::im::iny \.t.et:oof, the ea.id Comd.saiooers am the ddefs afocesald, 
have he..teto set their harrl4 ' '66'.la the ~ 
' year first z.bove written. 
Siqnei =I sealed ' deUV&ed 
. in the p~ 
of w. 
orrl of too Tribe. 
II. Sy== 
Se.th catl!n 
. Ni.colas 
Jozeioh """"' 
hLs 
Squire Ossarq 
"""' 
hLs 
Hect:trA 0<lr.d t 
"""" 
his 
~Peooe 
-· 
his 
Nlaro~th 
IMrk 
his 
Sabat.ls Neptuoo. 
"""" 
hlo 
Seher ,.,,..t 
"""" 
HaooXk s:s. /\Ug'Urt 6th 1796. 'Ihcl.r tha ablve l\.?m?:.'l ~, 
Dane, oayis, 
eroro, 03sanq, ~t. 
~, ~t, 
Nepblne, ,·Seb!r tt>seth 
pet"SOOally ~led9«\ tha aforesaid tnst:.r:utient bl be their free act ' 
-2-

~-~.~ .. 
.. ·· 
{The eb:wc cited &x:;urent ....a.a tranoc:r;"J.bed fr<n\ a certlfled 00{'/ Qf 
the od.ginal i!l!l reoocdo::J, in the Hancock CD.lnty P..:qlstr:y of Deeds oo 
I-by 3, 1809 in Dook 27 • p..-.<;Je 6 bf D. Hall, ~lstr~l 
•; . A~~,., : ,, 
:5.' . 
'~;t 
.. 
~t.:.,.tp.:· ..... 
... · 
~r;;. 
'· 
.. , 

:; 
.... 
·.:· .. 
. ; : ... ::· ., .··· . ., . 
. ·. 
·s TATE 0 F J.\i A°I NE. 
IN CouNCIL, March SW, 1843, 
Ordered, That the secretary of state be requested to cause the 
.treaties, bonds and other documents, now on file in the zecretary'& 
office; in re\ation tq the Penobscot and Passamaquoddy tribes of· 
Indians, ~ecessary to be preserved as evidence of their title to their 
lan<ls) and th.eir claims against the state, to be printed with the 
resolves for the year 1843. 
CYR{)S MOORE, per order •.. 
Read and .pasied. 
ATTEST: 
P. C. JOHNSON, Sec'y of Stale. 
-------
Treaty made by the Commonwealth of 1fassachusetls with 
the Penobscot tribe of Indians, June ~9 1 1818. 
This writing indented and made this tweaty ninth day of June, 
.. oa.e thousand eight hundred and eighteen, between ·Edward H. 
.-· 
Robbins,,Daniel Davis and Mark Langdon Hill, 'Esqs., commi'!Sion· 
•.is appointed by his excellency John Brooks, governor ~f the com· 
monwealth of lllassachusetts, by and with the advice of council, in 
~: . conformity to a resolve of the legislature of said commonw.ealth, 
· ·· 
passed the. thirteenth day of February, A. D. one thousand eight 
;..' . hundred and eighteen, to treat with the .Penobscot tribe of Indians 
~~ · . .'.up.o,n tho: subject. expressed in said resolve,. on . the one part; 
~r ·,iin'd'tho s~id Penobscot tribe of Indians, by tbe undersigned chiefs, 
·W~;.g;Q.~ptains · ~nd men of_ said tribe, representing the whole the~~?f, 
f;!{:!~oifjha other part, Witnesseth, That the said Penob00ot tribe 
~~(i.'bf:'Indians; fo, co.nsid.eration' <)f the payments by them now ,re· 
z,.· 
'ceived"of said· com':'issioners, amounting to four hundred dollars, 
1;;;-
·and; .of ihe payments hereby secure.d and· engaged to be made · 
;;,_ 
·t~ 'the.m by. said ~om~otiwealth,. do !t'ereby grant, sell, convoy, 
;~: 
',r'eleas.'" and quitclaim, to the commonwealth of Massachusetts, 
fr 
alnheir, the. said tribes, right, title, interest and estate, in and 
~f. ·.t'i all, the !ands' !l)ey claim, occupy and possess by any means wh~t· . 
ft"::· ~ver on lioth ·sides of the Penobscot river, and the branches thereof, 
!;!;' . 
~fi' 
y~:;f_ 
··~~ 

·•· 
1NDIAN 'I'REA'l'I~S . 
.; . 
. . 
'aboye the tract of thirty miles in length on both sides of said .ri.ver : ) 
. 
- ... ' . 
whieh sa\<l tribe conveyed and released to said .. commonw~·awi:·,.b/ :; 
their deed of the eighth of August, one thousand seven hund;~,() 
'and ninety six,.excepting and reserving from this sale and ~~~~ey:: ._; 
ance, fodhe perpetual use of said tribe of Indians, four' to\vns_hips_ f 
of land of six: miles.square e~ch, in the following _places, viz:'".'; ·::"\ . 
The 6rat beginning on the east bank.of the Pen'obscot river;·pp<;'l. 
posi(e the five 'islands, SQ called, and running up Said river accord:·~ 
. iog to its course, and crossi
0
ng the mouth .of the :Mattawa~~~g·;;; 
river,' an extent. of silc miles from the place of 'b.eginning/;.ai~C(j 
extending back from said river six miles, and to 'be laid. out 'ln ·~;;"ci:'':'~ 
rormity to • geriera1 plan ·or arrangement which'. shall :i'~"' ma::J1:'1R·:·; 
the survey of the adjoining townships on the' river4n~ .oth'e'r'iJ'f ·.:' 
. 
. . . 
. .. . .............. -~·-~··· •.:.-'· . . 
.$aid townships lies on the .oppoi;ite or westem·shore··an:ai<l::.t'W~r; 
and is to begin· ns nearly'opposite to tbe place of beginning ~(the. 
firi;f described township as can be, having regard to the ge'ii~rai pi an ... ; 
of the townships that may be laid out on· the w.Stern s"de of said,;,\ 
PenObs.cot river, an·d ruflning up sai~_ river ac_cordiog to its co·~~e·,~~~ 
si~ n1.iles, and e.xteading back :rom said river six. mile~. 
Tw.o_·o·~~~r .~~~ 
of said townslnps are td begm, at the foot of an ~lan.~, ·tU.(lV_e:;t;i'!}l 
branch of Penobscot river in _Nolacen1eac lake, aa.d:~x~~~.d'i~g··j~~~, 
both sides of said lake, bounding on the ninth rang~: o( t~\VnSh\j)~;·?~ 
surveyed by Samuel.Weston, Esq., which two townships_shall.~o.6~it' 
tain six: m
0ilcs squa~e ea?h, to_ .be l~i~ ou~ so a~ to .~~~~.sP.<?,9.,~ .. j~~~ 
co.urses Wlth ~he t~wosb1ps :which pol/( .are,_.?~ her:~(~es 1~~.:(~~~~~.~~::~ 
vey~d on the pu~ltc lands of the sta.t~ ... A.nd.th~ s.a1d)f!b .. ~e2,~t~g.;;~ 
rel~ase and di?cbarg~ sai~ com~.on~eal.tb fi:o.~. ~~l .. ~-~ffi~._.i}f.r~;j~l~ij 
claims of any kin~ arid descript!on, ln. ~.ons_t;qu~~?~; ~(.-~!l_i,C;l,~~P,~~:s~ 
~~denture and _agreement mad~ ~ith .said c~m~~.O~Y<e.~1.~h?/~";Wff~~ · 
e~ghth day .of Auli".st'. one tho~s~nd .seven. hyo_cj,e~. ic:r.t?JNAMf"J:J,• 
six, by ~heir. co'."m1ss1on~rs, Wilham Sbep_p~r~,:.~•.t\•,a.,~;~$.~, 
a.n~ Daniel Da~i;s, ~quires; aad .~·e ~~c ;~un~.~':StE?~~~~mlS1~ _. 
ston:rs on .our part m .be~,alf:?f.:s~1~ .. ~\UJU91\}Y,W~k"~~· 
erai1on of .the abo~e·;oy~a~aats1 .a~~ ,r,ff.le.as:~·.9~~.t!it2ffi~~~~~~~t 
trib~, do. covenant with .~a1~.J'en?~s.~B,t .. ~~~~-of~~,qp1.~gaf~~g~ 
shall .h~ve, enj?Y ~nd imp~ov.e ,al.l,(tl)~; ~~"Y.:°:~~Ptfj_Jf~-i11s 
described as af~r~~atd, .anil_ all,,,t~~. !~\•?,sf~ .. ~~,;J.h.~}~.~~.~1l,~9wi,'ifi 
abov.e 0.1d\own and inclti,d,ing .~~i.~,9.l~,~O.!~~.·i~\~.9.\1.,'Y~'R~·~~gW!"~m· 
missioners will purchn1e fo,r.,tlJe\(.ti.~~.:~~. ~for.~~'.~• ~W?..~filfJ.f.1QW1<I 
in ~he town .~f ~re~~r, .a? Jo},~.~~.$, ~1~n??.~c~!i~~~~.~~T~~Q~~$*~~~ · 
th~1r occup~t1on, a.n~ Pi:?V~d~.!~~:~:.W.l~l~.~~.:~?~;.c-:'ii-~~!l'lt?:~~~~~oCI 
P1.~.ral ch.arapt,er .~nd J~d-~~lJ~2~~.~~~.1:~1~t~1ilP~J:¥S~,~~~~~~~J~ 
of hu~ba~?ry,. and. asst,•! .. t~~.~.' .'~, \e~~!!lf·~.9.~.:.!U}!~~.\t~~ll;t,~roun s, 
. 
. ' 
. . . . 
·'.:~l 

INDIAN TREATiEs: 
·arid raising suCh ·articles of production aS th~ir lanrls ·are suited for, 
and:as \~ill be ll)OSt beneficial for''them,·;~d \Yill er.eel a st6re·o·h the 
iSla11d of Oldto\vn, or Contiguous th~ret_o, in which lo d~posil th~ir 
· yearly sUpplie.'i, and will no\V rnake some necessary repairs on th~ir 
church, ~nd pay and deliver to said Indian~ for their absolute use, 
'fithin ninety days from this dale, at ·said island ?f Oldtown, the fol-
lowing articles viz: one six. pOurid can'non·, one ~wive\, fifty ~nives, 
six \Jrass kettles, two.hundred yards <?f calico, \wo drums, four fifes, v 
·On~ boi::'pipes; three ~unilred ·yards .<;>f 'ri~bon, 'and .that annually, 
.. an'd every' year, so long as !hey .~hall .'r~:oain ".nation, and reside 
.... withiil'"ihe commonwealth 'of 111assachUieus·, said Cc>mmonwcalth 
. will delive.r for the use of said Pe~obSC$)t.tribe 9f I,n,di~ns.:a.t, oi.d~ 
1 town afor!'Said, in tbe month of October, the foll'?wing articles viz: 
five hund;:.d bushels of corn, fifteen barrels of .:wheat .flour, seven 
barrels of clear pork, one hogshead of molasses, and one hundred 
yards of double breadth broad clot\.>, to. be of red color one year, 
and.blue the ne'.l(t year, and so on alternately, fifty .good blankets, 
one hundred pounds of 'gunpowder, four hundred pounds of shot, 
si:c.boxeS of chocolate, one hundred aild fifty pounds of -tobaceo, 
and fifty"dollais in silver: 
The delivery of the artiCies last afore-
. said to.cCirctmenco iri October next; and·to· be divided and 'Cli;trib-
u.led at 'four di"fferent times in ·each 'year,. aOion"g said tribe; i~ such 
manner as that their wants sball be most ~entially"supplied, 'and 
their biisiness most effectually s~pported. And it.is further agreed· 
by and·On ihe part of said tribe, that the said commonwealth shall 
have a right at all times hereafter to make and. keep opeq all nec-
essary roads, through any lands hereby rei:erved. for the 'future use 
of said tnbe .. And that the citizens or'said commonwealth shall 
ba~e ~ right to \;a.sS and repass any. ~r' tbe. rl;ers, slrea;,,s, ai:id 
ponds,. whic~ run. through ,any of the lands hereby reserved, for .the 
_ purpose 'of transporting their timber and other arlicl?S through \be 
sam~ .... : t ~.·... ·;-
. 
~ · 
. : · 
. ; 
, 
· 
· · 
.. · '· ·• 
1
• • • 
·i;;'Y(i\ness \Yhere0f, the.parties 'aforesaid have hereunto set our 
' . 
• . 
. 
·I•:, . • 
• • 
hands and seal. 
~~:\. 
..: ... 
·~·Y·.o::.~.·. 
·: ... 
::::.r:·.:·}: .. ~ -·: 
"~'.f: :.u ::::· ;,i 
.Edw'dH. Robbins. 
. '"D3.niiNDavis·:·'"·· · 
Jli:ark Langdon Hill. 
. 
hls 
; :·. . ·.: 
; . 
. 
John H Et1en, Governor. 
mad:;. 
> ; •• • 
(Seal.) 
(Seal.) 
(Seal:) .. 
. · ... :~ 
•• ~!:')'\ i: 
(.Seal.) 
b1.s . 
, . 
-~ 
John H Neptune, Lt. Gover,nor. 
(S~~.) · 
rnadc.. 
. 
, · 
. 
· 
1 • 
hit ~ 
: .• v ... ·,i 
.~ .. 1:" ,·,\'~.: •: 
Fran.cis H LOlo.n, 
. (Seal;),}•· 
. 
mack. 
: . 
,1 "- .. ·\~1.~1 "'~~· 
.. Nicholao Neptune, 
: .' ,,.,(Seal,) i.: 
· .. : 
·, 
····. 
·. ·-· 
... 

. 
. 
. 
INDIAN ;I'REATlES. 
. 
bis 
. 
. I 
Sock H Joseph, Captain. 
• 
tna..rk. 
bh 
John H Nichol.s, Captain. 
"'"" 
bu-
. 
Etien H Mitchell,,Captain. 
mu\:, 
. hh 
Piel N Marie. 
miltk. 
hU 
Piel N Peruit, Colo. 
mark. 
. his 
Piel N Tomah. 
muk. 
Signed, sudul and tMivtred } · 
in presence of Us: 
. 
Lothrop Lewis, 
Ino. Blake, 
Joseph Lee, 
. 
Eb.en'r W fabster, 
Joseph Whipple. 
;.,<°fi'~ii.)'"' 
. ... :,•;..: 
(seiil.) 
(Seal.) . 
(Seitl.) 
. (Seal.) , 
(Sea1:{· 
PENOBSCOT, ss.--June 30th, 1818. Personally. appeared th 
aforenamed Edward H. Robbins, Daniel Davis, and Mark Lang 
don Hill, Esquires, .and John. Etien, John Neptune, Francis Lolor 
Nicholas N"eptune, Sock Joseph, John Nicholas, Etien Mitchel 
Piel Matie, Piel Penuil, and Piel ·Tomab, subscribers to the "rorc 
going instrument, and severally acknowledged. the· same to be the 
free act and -deed. 
BEFORE. MEJ 
. 
WILLIAM D. WILLIAM$0N, Justice of the Peace.· 
P>:!loilsco'l.', ts. 
Received July lst, 1818, and recorded in bOt 
No. 4, page 195, and examined by 
Cop§ exa!nined. 
.JOHN WIJ:,iUNS, Register. 
A. BRADFORD, Secretary~. 
of commonwealth of Massachusetts. 

... 
EXHIBIT C 


cU~ t:?&~ ,L; /~'~ + (~. 
cAz~ v~ 
.;:t?~,-k:.,,,,:·s). 
c&,.;,,e~ c_,f<.c~ .£µ .... ,,;. · . 
.,.-·.~

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0215 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
All,
Many tribes hold reserved rights to resources on lands and waters where states establish water quality 
standards, through treaties, statutes, or other sources of federal law. The U.S. Constitution defines 
treaties as the supreme law of the land. EPA is pursuing a change to its water quality standards 
regulations to ensure that water quality standards do not impair tribal reserved rights by giving clear 
direction on how to develop water quality standards where tribes hold reserved rights. This will help 
EPA ensure protection of resources reserved to tribes in treaties, statutes, or other sources of federal 
law when establishing, revising, and reviewing water quality standards
I agree the statement above and ask that the EPA respect the treaty rights of tribes when determining 
water quality standards.
Eric Rempala
N5776 Woodenware rd 
Irma WI 54442

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0185 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
1400 North Dutton Avenue, Suite 7, Santa Rosa, CA 95401 
1400 North Dutton Avenue, Suite 7, Santa Rosa CA 95401 
Elem Indian Colony
A Sovereign Nation 
1400 North Dutton Avenue, Suite 7 Santa Rosa, CA 95401
 Phone (707) 541-6516 
www.elemindiancolony.org 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TO:   
Office of Water, Standards and Health Protection Division (4305T), 
Environmental Protection Agency 
 
                                    
                        
FROM:  
Dr. F.E. Kirschner, Acting Environmental Director, Elem Indian Colony 
 
DATE:  
March 5, 2023 
 
SUBJECT:    Comments on ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY40 CFR Part 
131[EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791; FRL-8599-01-OW]RIN 2040-AG17Water Quality 
Standards; Federal Register Volume 87, Number 232 (Monday, December 5, 
2022)][Proposed Rules]; Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
 
CC: 
Chairman Garcia,  Elem Indian Colony 
 
Kyle Cohen, Esq., Elem Indian Colony 
File 
 
________________________________________________________________________ 
We have been in contact with many Tribes throughout the U.S. We request that the comment 
period be extended to enable more Tribes to participate.  Our General Comments follow: 
1. We concur with much of the legal analyses provided in the draft.  However, the technical 
portion of the draft requires rethinking and re-drafting.  Many of the technical problems 
and past poor legal analyses have led Tribes to negotiating standards with states or the 
EPA.  Once acceptable risk, fish consumption rates, and other exposure factors have been 
determined, risk based CWA numerical standards are calculated—not negotiated. 
2. Allowable risk is determined by tribal governments—not EPA.  Restricting the quality of 
resources based on EPA’s recommended risk level is a non-congressional abrogation of 
trust responsibility. 
3. Our 30 years experience1 of working with tribes indicates that tribes who have access to 
aquatic resources prefer those sources of protein over terrestrial-based protein2, and that 
                                                           
1 The author has been involved in drafting Human Health Risk Scenarios for nearly 10 tribes, Including the 
Spokanes, and the Maine Tribes which are cited in the draft. 

 
 
 
 
1400 North Dutton Avenue, Suite 7, Santa Rosa, CA 95401 
1400 North Dutton Avenue, Suite 7, Santa Rosa CA 95401 
subpopulations or clans of high-aquatic protein consumers within these tribes must 
benefit from equal protection as the remainder of the members.  STI’s standards are 
based on nearly 100% protein consumed from aquatic resources.  These standards should 
suffice as the upper bound of heavy fish consuming subpopulations.  
4. Human Health Risk Scenarios have been developed to represent a large number of Tribes 
residing in the various physiographic provinces in the United States.3  These scenarios 
were developed specifically for the purpose of assessing risk in Indian Country.  This 
work has been omitted from the draft. 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
 
2 The level of effort for obtaining daily protein from aquatic resources is much lower than that for terrestrial 
resources.  Hence aquatic resources are generally preferred over terrestrial protein sources. 
3 Harper, B.L., Harding, A.K. Waterhouse,T. and Harris, S.G., 2007,Traditional Tribal Subsistence Exposure 
Scenario and Risk Assessment Guidance Manual. Corvallis: Oregon State University. 
http://superfund.oregonstate.edu/outreachevents;

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0253 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
 
Michael S. Regan 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center, Office of Water Docket 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
 
Administrator Regan, 
 
The US Environmental Protection Agency’s proposed rule, “Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights,” represents a first-of-its-kind 
step that will press states into a new quagmire of regulatory burdens.  These burdens 
will fall particularly hard on Idaho, whose boundaries include five federally 
recognized Indian tribes.  As set out below, Idaho welcomes the opportunity to speak 
to important issues arising from the EPA’s action and invites the EPA to the table to 
coordinate a better way forward. 
 
Procedurally, the proposed rule warrants a longer public comment period with more 
public hearing opportunities.  The current 90-day period, which is set to close on 
March 6, does not provide stakeholders sufficient time for input.  And the two public 
hearings, each only two hours, left little room for dialogue.  The proposed rule’s 
novelty and complexity requires more.  See 33 U.S.C. § 1251(e).  So Idaho joins the 
other public commenters that have called on the EPA to extend the public comment 
period.  Please do so. 
 
Substantively, the proposed rule strays well beyond its statutory footing.  The 
purpose of the Clean Water Act is to control pollution of federal waters.  See 33 U.S.C. 
§ 1251.  But the proposed rule introduces a wholly new aim of preserving “tribal 
reserved rights.”  This experiment falls outside the scope of EPA’s authority under 
the Clean Water Act.  The Act delineates what the EPA may consider in setting water 
quality standards, and nothing approaching the category of tribal reserved rights is 
among the considerations.  See 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(2)(A).  Simply put, protecting 
federal waters from pollution is not the same as protecting “past, present, or future” 
tribal rights.  Nor is EPA entitled to administrative deference, whether for its 

rulemaking or for the scope of its jurisdiction, with respect to Indian treaties and 
their accompanying federal regulatory regime, which EPA does not administer. 
 
This new endeavor also introduces an entitlement foreign to the CWA regulatory 
landscape.  Under the proposed rule, State Water Quality Standards must be 
informed by “right holders” and protect “tribal reserved rights.”  This effectively 
codifies an entitlement to the continuing availability of “aquatic and/or aquatic-
dependent resources,” as opposed just to access such resources.  And trusteeship of 
the so-called tribal reserved rights is being foisted upon states.  The Clean Water Act 
in no way delegates this rulemaking authority to the EPA.  At the very least, such a 
major question requires a clearer delegation from Congress. 
 
The proposed rule thus runs afoul of important constitutional concerns. It tramples 
over federalism by commandeering states and their resources. For example, the EPA 
now commands states to (i) discover the “current and past use” of tribal reserved 
rights (a feat that has eluded the federal government for 150 years); (ii) consult with 
“Right Holders”; (iii) designate uses that “expressly incorporate protection of tribal 
reserved rights or encompass such rights”; (iv) establish water quality criteria that 
“protect tribal reserved rights”; (v) hold public hearings to evaluate whether there are 
tribal reserved rights in need of protection; and (vi) reexamine any waterbody 
segment with water quality standards to ensure tribal reserved rights are protected, 
amongst other tasks. This gargantuan demand not only disrespects state sovereignty, 
but it also imposes an enormous economic burden on states—one that plainly makes 
the proposed rule a “major rule” under 5 U.S.C. § 804(2).  
 
The proposed rule also unnecessarily entangles states with federal questions of tribal 
relations. Any “treaty, statute, executive order, or other source of federal law” is the 
province of the federal government, not Idaho, to figure out with tribes. Indeed, the 
US Constitution reserves this role to the federal government. States should not be 
forced to act as ambassadors to tribes to ensure federally granted rights are protected. 
 
Congress enacted the Clean Water Act under its Commerce Clause powers. The 
proposed rule demonstrates just how far afield from that constitutional grant the 
EPA has run. And so the bottom line is that the Clean Water Act is not the proper 
vehicle to protect what the EPA is calling tribal reserved rights.  Idaho respectfully 
requests the EPA to withdraw the proposed rule or at the very least to extend the 
public comment period an appropriate length for additional stakeholder input. 
 
Respectfully, 
 
/s/ Scott L. Campbell 
Scott L. Campbell 
Deputy Attorney General 
Chief, Energy & Natural Resources Division

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0187 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
STATE OF MICHIGAN 
DEPARTMENT OF 
ENVIRONMENT, GREAT LAKES, AND ENERGY 
LANSING 
 
CONSTITUTION HALL • 525 WEST ALLEGAN STREET • P.O. BOX 30473 • LANSING, MICHIGAN 48909-7973 
Michigan.gov/EGLE • 800-662-9278 
GRETCHEN WHITMER 
GOVERNOR 
DANIEL EICHINGER 
ACTING DIRECTOR 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
 
VIA ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center, Office of Water Docket 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW (28221T) 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
 
The Water Resources Division of Michigan’s Department of Environment, Great Lakes, 
and Energy (EGLE), submits this comment letter concerning the United States 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (USEPA’s) proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
concerning section 303(c) of the federal Water Pollution Control Act, known as the 
Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1313(c). The rule, if promulgated as currently 
drafted, would revise 40 C.F.R. § 131 to require states to adopt water quality standards 
that protect tribal rights reserved under treaties, statutes, executive orders, and other 
unnamed federal authority.  
EGLE recognizes USEPA’s trust relationship with the 574 federally recognized Indian 
tribes in the United States, as well as the pressing water quality issues tribal 
communities face. Likewise, EGLE understands that federal law both recognizes tribal 
reserved rights and the rights the federal government has granted to federally 
recognized Indian tribes, which are enforceable under the United States Constitution 
against states and other parties. EGLE does not dispute its obligation to follow federal 
law concerning both types of tribal rights. It confirms its commitment to working with its 
tribal partners in Michigan to address water quality issues. 
However, EGLE has substantial concerns about the proposed rule’s legal basis, 
vagueness, ability to be implemented, burdens on states, and rushed timeline. EGLE 
finds it highly problematic that USEPA appears to be pursuing a theory that all treaties 
and other authorities that reserve rights to tribes have an implied environmental 
servitude, an argument that is not on firm legal ground. Most of all, EGLE is troubled 
about the way the proposed rule would pit states and tribes against one another rather 
than providing opportunities for them to work with each other. That outcome is wholly 
unnecessary and detrimental to the working relationship between federal, state, and 
tribal governments, while doing nothing to enhance water quality beyond what the 
current regulations require. For all these reasons, EGLE urges USEPA to stop pursuing 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 2 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
this nationwide rule to protect tribal reserved rights because it is at odds with the 
individual nature of reserved rights. Instead, USEPA should take three steps. 
First, USEPA should actively work with states and tribes to understand the threats to 
aquatic resources on which tribal communities rely that can be mitigated under existing 
federal Clean Water Act authority concerning water quality standards, including state 
regulations that satisfy the federal Clean Water Act. Second, USEPA should seek 
amendments to the federal Clean Water Act to obtain the authority to address modern 
and emerging threats to tribal communities that the federal Clean Water Act does not 
currently provide, rather than attempt to rework treaties, statutes, executive orders, and 
other federal authority to provide remedies for problems that were never contemplated 
at the time they became law. Finally, USEPA should develop a far narrower rule or 
guidance that provides a framework for assessing and responding to evidence that 
water quality standards in a particular state violate tribal reserved rights to avoid any 
conflict between the federal Clean Water Act and a treaty or other binding law. 
 
USEPA has not articulated a legal basis for the proposed rule. 
The federal Clean Water Act does not have a single provision that allows or directs 
USEPA to determine whether a federally recognized Indian tribe (tribe) has explicit or 
implied “reserved rights” under a treaty, statute, executive order, or other unnamed 
federal authority. Nor does the federal Clean Water Act require states to search for such 
reserved rights and propose water quality standards to protect them, much less that 
they should do so every three years. If any authority existed in the federal Clean Water 
Act to pursue reserved rights in this way, USEPA would have cited it in its public notice.   
Instead, USEPA’s public notice cites § 511(a)(3) of the federal Clean Water Act, 
33 U.S.C. § 1371(a)(3), and the agency’s “discretion” under the federal Clean Water Act 
to require states to adopt water quality standards as the legal basis for the proposed 
rule. That claim does not withstand scrutiny. 
 
Section 511(a)(3) is a statement by Congress concerning how to 
interpret the Clean Water Act, not a source of authority on which 
USEPA can rely to expand its powers. 
Section 511(a) of the federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1371(a)(3), provides, “This 
chapter shall not be construed as … (3) affecting or impairing the provisions of any 
treaty of the United States.” The statutory language explains that the provisions within 
the “chapter,” i.e., Chapter 26 of the federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251–1389, 
cannot be understood to affect or impair a United States treaty, regardless of the type of 
treaty at issue.  
The type of conflict that Congress prohibited in § 511(a)(3) is one that would change or 
make worse the terms of any treaty, regardless of whether the treaty is with an Indian 
tribe or other country. See Merriam-Webster.com, 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 3 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
Merriam-Webster.com/Dictionary/Affect (last visited January 27, 2023) (to “affect” 
means to “act on and cause a change in” a thing); Merriam-Webster.com, Merriam-
Webster.com/Dictionary/Impair, (last visited January 27, 2023) (to impair means “to 
diminish in function, ability, or quality” or “to weaken or make worse”). Nothing in this 
statutory language delegates authority or discretion to USEPA. In fact, the statutory 
language does not refer to USEPA at all, much less empower it to take any actions 
regarding treaties or treaty rights, federally recognized Indian tribes, or any other related 
matter. Nor does it refer to states or impose any obligations on states concerning treaty 
rights, federally recognized Indian tribes, or any other matter. 
If anything, § 511(a)(3) carefully guards against Executive branch agencies like USEPA 
usurping the Senate’s power to have the final say on a treaty’s terms by claiming to give 
effect to treaty rights. See U.S. Const, Art. 2, §2, cl. 2 (treaty clause requires the “Advice 
and Consent of the Senate” to ratify treaties). As former USEPA Administrator Gina 
McCarthy recognized, “[T]reaties do not expand the EPA’s authority….” See McCarthy, 
USEPA, Memorandum, Commemorating the 30th Anniversary of the EPA's Indian 
Policy (December 1, 2014), p. 1. Rather, USEPA’s role is simply to “ensure its actions 
do not conflict with tribal treaty rights.” McCarthy Memorandum, p 1 (emphasis added). 
But USEPA far exceeds its obligation not to take actions that conflict with treaty rights in 
the proposed tribal reserved rights rule. USEPA is attempting to create a new, 
affirmative obligation for states to search for reserved rights in 370 Senate-ratified 
treaties, something not contemplated in § 511(a)(3), and to somehow return water 
quality and resource availability to what it was at a point in the distant historical past. 
USEPA only cements the conclusion that it has far exceeded its statutory authority by 
proposing to require states to shoulder this research burden for an unknown number of 
statutes, executive orders, and other federal authority it does not (or cannot) identify, 
none of which are mentioned in § 511(a)(3). Section 511(a)(3) unmistakably fails to give 
USEPA’s authority to promulgate the proposed rule. 
 
Promulgating the proposed rule would put the Administrator at risk 
of repeatedly causing conflict with treaties, which Congress did not 
intend when it enacted § 511(a)(3). 
Adopting the proposed rule would put the Administrator in the position of running afoul 
of § 511(a)(3) repeatedly by altering the meaning of treaties because USEPA’s 
proposed process for determining reserved rights appears not to be calculated to 
provide the serious, individualized analysis the Indian canons of construction require. 
According to USEPA, under the proposed rule states must go to rights holders to start 
an engagement process that will result in the rights holders sharing information that the 
state can “use in its evaluation” of reserved rights. 87 Fed. Reg. 74,367 (December 5, 
2022). USEPA envisions that it could then participate in discussions with the state and 
rights holders that will result in the rights holders influencing the decisions concerning 
“whether tribal reserved rights apply and, where reserved rights are applicable, how 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 4 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
those reserved rights could be protected through implementation of the requirements of 
the proposed rulemaking.” 87 Fed. Reg. 74,367. USEPA adds that it will also “consider 
other sources of information regarding applicable tribal reserved rights including the 
language of the treaties, statutes, or Executive orders and relevant judicial precedent.” 
Id. 
USEPA misses the mark with the process, which is designed to obtain concurrence 
from rights holders, but not designed to determine the historical Indian understanding of 
a treaty, statute, etc. See Tulee v. State of Washington, 315 U.S. 681, 684 (1942) 
(Indian canons require treaty to be understood “by the tribal representatives at the 
council” where the treaty was negotiated). USEPA also assumes that rights holders 
have information that sheds light on how the individual tribal leaders who negotiated 
with the United States understood the document being negotiated at the time it was 
negotiated and that they will share it with states and the federal government.  
In reality, some rights holders may have very little information or no information that is 
germane to a historical Indian understanding analysis. Nor are they guaranteed to have 
the evidence relevant to determining whether:   
• A subsequent treaty or act of Congress abrogated the rights, see United States 
v. Dion, 476 U.S. 734, 738–39 (1986); 
• The treaty tribes gave up their rights by abandoning the place where the rights 
could be exercised, Williams v. City of Chicago, 242 U.S. 434, 437 (1917); or 
• The treaty rights terminated pursuant to the treaty’s terms, such as when treaty 
rights are temporary and time passes, Lac Courte Oreilles Band of Lake Superior 
Chippewa Indians v. Voigt, 700 F.2d 341, 358 (7th Cir. 1983), or when a 
designated extinguishing event occurs, Minnesota v. Mille Lacs Band of 
Chippewa Indians, 526 U.S. 172, 207 (1999). 
And even if the rights holder had the best document collections, nothing in the federal 
Clean Water Act or the proposed rule compels rights holders to share those documents 
with states. As a result, this engagement process may not offer states any materials to 
analyze, or the information states obtain may be inadequate for developing water quality 
standards. 
USEPA’s statement that it will consider the plain language of treaties, statutes, and 
executive orders as well as judicial decisions offers little comfort to a state like Michigan. 
Between the Treaty of Fort M’Intosh, 7 Stat. 16 (January 21, 1785) and the Treaty with 
the Chippewa of Saginaw, Black River, and Swan Creek, 14 Stat. 657 (October 18, 
1864), the United States executed more than twenty-five treaties (including 
supplementary articles) with indigenous people living in what is now Michigan. But so 
far, the courts have adjudicated tribal usufructuary rights claims under only two treaties:  
the Treaty of Washington, 7 Stat. 491 (March 28, 1836) and the Treaty of LaPointe, 7 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 5 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
Stat. 591 (October 4, 1842). See People v. LeBlanc, 248 N.W.2d 199 (1976); People v. 
Jondreau, 185 N.W.2d 375 (1971). 
The limited case law concerning usufructuary rights in Michigan leaves a vast gap 
between the settled judicial understanding of tribal reserved rights in Michigan and the 
entirety of the rights USEPA seeks to establish. For example, the proposed rule does 
not explain how USEPA intends for states and its own staff to proceed if: 
• The language of the treaty, statute, executive order, or other federal authority is 
not clear about reserved rights; 
• There is no judicial precedent, or the precedent does not resolve the specific 
right claimed to be reserved; 
• The rights holders do not have relevant information or are unwilling to share the 
information they do have; 
• There is a conflict among the rights holders about the rights reserved or the 
water quality standards required to protect them; 
• There is no clear connection between water quality standards that a state can 
implement and the conditions threatening water quality or aquatic resources; or 
• Other federal agencies disagree about the existence or nature of the tribal 
reserved rights in a particular instance. 
Nor does USEPA explain why states should be required to determine reserved rights 
under all treaties, statutes, executive order, and other authority that might exist if they 
set statewide water-quality standards, particularly if those standards already protect 
reserved rights. And these are just a sampling of the issues that may arise when 
attempting to determine whether reserved rights exist. 
This gray area about reserved rights is exactly what places the Administrator at risk of 
violating § 511(a)(3) if USEPA promulgates this proposed rule. If USEPA acts with too 
little information about tribal reserved rights, it stands a significant chance of 
inadvertently (but avoidably) altering a treaty’s terms and therefore causing an 
impermissible conflict by its action on the state’s water quality standards. The fact that 
USEPA’s action may benefit rights holders and have their support is immaterial because 
it has no authority over treaty terms, which are entrusted to the President to negotiate 
and the United States Senate to ratify. 
If USEPA expects states to take on the time-consuming and expensive historical and 
anthropological research and analysis required to determine Indian understanding of 
historical treaties, statutes, and executive orders, it is entirely unclear whether those 
steps will serve any purpose. Three years is often not enough time to conduct the 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 6 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
research and analysis necessary to resolve the status or contours of tribal reserved 
rights. Indeed, during the COVID-19 pandemic, many of the key institutions that hold 
historical documents, such as the National Archives and state archives, were closed to 
researchers for an extended period. Even if states do obtain the needed information, it 
is not at all clear how to translate the observations in historical records into modern 
water quality standards. And it is also unclear how tying updated water quality 
standards to historical research may limit a state’s ability to respond in a timely way to 
emerging pollutants and other critical water quality issues. 
In any case, USEPA has not committed to reviewing the historical documents states 
collect. And if the agency were to review those historical documents, its ability to 
interpret them and properly understand them in context is doubtful. Congress certainly 
did not intend § 511(a)(3) to give USEPA the authority to take on a task so distant from 
its scientific expertise and with such potentially significant consequences for treaty 
terms over which it exercises no control. 
 
USEPA’s general authority to require states to adopt water quality 
standards does not include the discretion to determine the 
existence, nature, and scope of reserved rights.  
USEPA also claims that the “structure and objectives for the establishment and 
oversight of” water quality standards give it the “discretion” to adopt the proposed rule. 
But that is not the case. See generally City of Albuquerque v. Browner, 97 F.3d 415, 
424–25 (10th Cir. 1996) (Congress intended USEPA “to have a very limited role” in 
reviewing water quality standards proposed by states or tribes). 
Section 501 of the federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1361(a), grants the USEPA 
Administrator authority to “prescribe such regulations as are necessary to carry out his 
functions under this chapter.” (Emphasis added). But nothing in Chapter 26 of the 
federal Clean Water Act makes it the Administrator’s function to determine the 
existence, nature, and scope of tribal rights reserved in treaties, statutes, executive 
orders, or other sources of federal authority. Congress had no reason to give the 
Administrator any of those duties. 
The Administrator’s staff at USEPA—like EGLE’s own staff—is comprised of scientists 
and engineers. Even USEPA’s lawyers are not historians, ethnohistorians, linguists, 
geographers, and the other professionals who have the education, skill, and experience 
to research and interpret treaties, statutes, executive orders, and other federal 
authorities in historical context. Without a statutory function that coincides with this sort 
of broad authority over Indian affairs, the rule cannot be considered necessary within 
the meaning of § 501. 
If Congress wanted USEPA to be able to determine whether tribal reserved rights exist 
and how to address them when administering the triennial review process under 
§ 303(c) of the federal Clean Water Act, it would have said so explicitly. Six different 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 7 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
provisions in Chapter 26 of the federal Clean Water Act expressly refer to treaties. See 
33 U.S.C. §§ 1253, 1268, 1271, 1320, 1321b, 1371. Fifteen provisions in Chapter 26 
use the term “Indian,” “tribe,” or “tribal.” See 33 U.S.C. §§ 1254, 1268, 1275, 1276, 
1302f, 1314, 1321, 1321a, 1321b, 1330, 1346, 1362, 1377, 1377a, 1383. But none of 
those terms appear in § 303(c), 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c), much less language that requires 
states to seek out tribal reserved rights and tailor their water quality standards to those 
protect the “unsuppressed” use of those rights. Congress would not have left USEPA 
searching the structure and objectives of the federal Clean Water Act for a hint about its 
authority concerning tribal reserved rights if authority existed. See generally Food & 
Drug Admin. v. Brown & Williamson Tobacco Corp., 529 U.S. 120, 160 (2000) 
(expressing doubt that Congress would have conferred important regulatory powers in a 
“cryptic … fashion”). 
 
The proposed rule cannot be adopted because it is vague. 
The federal Clean Water Act is a national act and USEPA proposes to adopt a 
nationwide rule concerning tribal reserved rights. But treaties, statutes, or executive 
orders involving Indian tribes do not reflect nationally uniform terms and rights. And how 
could they? Tribal reserved rights arise in highly distinctive contexts with certain people, 
particular places, and a specific historical backdrop, all of which was understood 
through the different languages and cultural perspectives of distinct indigenous people. 
Looking for those nuances is exactly what the Indian canons of construction require. 
See Mille Lacs, 526 U.S. at 202 (“the history and the negotiations of the agreements is 
central to the interpretation of treaties”). That makes for a very bad fit between the 
sources of federal law that have recognized tribal reserved rights and this type of 
nationwide rule USEPA is proposing. 
That misfit is apparent from the fact that USEPA has had to omit all meaningful details 
from the rule to try to make it apply nationwide. The result is that the proposed rule, if 
adopted, would be fundamentally flawed because it is vague. See generally New York 
State Comm'n on Cable Television v. F.C.C., 669 F.2d 58, 66 (2d Cir. 1982) 
(considering whether federal agency’s order was “based upon adequately articulated 
factual and legal premises” or was vague). The weaknesses in the proposed rule are 
apparent from the fact that USEPA could easily make it more specific or tailored, but the 
agency has chosen not to make it so. See New Mexico v. EPA, 114 F.3d 290, 294 (D.C. 
Cir. 1997) (“Everything else being equal, the better a petitioner can demonstrate the 
feasibility of greater specificity the more convincing its attack on agency vagueness.”). 
 
The proposed rule fails to identify the type of reserved rights that 
states must address through their water quality standards. 
The most glaring omission in the proposed tribal reserved rights rule is its failure to 
identify the type of reserved rights that would be subject to the rule. According to 
USEPA’s public notice, “‘tribal reserved rights’ means any rights to aquatic and/or 
aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 8 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of Federal law.” 87 Fed. 
Reg. 74,363 (December 5, 2022) (emphasis added). 
Are the rights referenced in the proposed rule usufructuary rights? Property rights? 
Some other type of rights that may or may not be relevant in a riparian rights state? The 
proposed rule fails to make the type of right or rights clear. Indeed, the reference to 
“other sources of Federal law” that USEPA does not name suggests that this vagueness 
is intentional and intended to evade limits and predictable applications. That vagueness 
denies states the opportunity to use existing case law to clarify which rights fall within 
the scope of the proposed rule and, therefore, understand how to comply with it. 
Likewise, it is likely to lead to arbitrary and capricious decision by USEPA concerning 
which tribes have reserved rights and what those rights include. 
 
The proposed rule fails to identify rights holders states must consult. 
Michigan is currently home to twelve federally recognized Indian tribes, each of which is 
identified annually in a list published by the Bureau of Indian Affairs in the Federal 
Register. See Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994, Pub. L. 103–454; 108 
Stat. 4791 (November 2, 1994). Should the United States recognize additional tribes, 
EGLE need only consult that list and other formal notices by the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
to confirm the identity of the tribes. 
The State of Michigan maintains a government-to-government relationship with each 
federally recognized Indian tribe in the state. Every department of the Executive branch 
of Michigan’s government, including EGLE, has at least one staff member designated 
as a tribal liaison. See Executive Directive 2019-17 (February 21, 2020), available at 
Michigan.gov/Whitmer/News/State-Orders-and-Directives/2020/02/21/Executive-
Directive-2019-17. Both EGLE’s tribal liaisons and many of its program staff have 
experience consulting and working with the environmental staff for the Michigan tribes, 
with higher-level state and tribal officials maintaining more formal aspects of the 
relationship. USEPA would not have to include engagement as a part of the proposed 
rule for that to be part of EGLE’s approach to developing water quality standards that 
affect Michigan’s tribes. 
But USEPA has not limited the proposed rule to reserved rights issues involving 
federally recognized Indian tribes. The proposed rule leaves unanswered who USEPA 
thinks are the other rights holders who should be involved in this reserved rights 
process. USEPA does not explain how states should search for these individuals or 
groups, or how they should determine who has a legitimate claim to extant reserved 
rights. Nor does USEPA say how it expects states to resolve disputes among multiple 
individuals or groups claiming to hold reserved rights, or how it will harmonize its 
decisions about rights holders who have sought but been denied federal 
acknowledgment by Congress or the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Given the prominent roles 
that non-tribal rights holders play in the proposed rule, the vagueness is a critical flaw 
that cannot be overlooked. 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 9 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
 
The proposed rule fails to define or adequately explain key terms and 
concepts. 
The proposed rule is also vague because it fails to define key terms that provide the 
substance of what states would be required to do or protect if the rule is promulgated. 
For instance, “aquatic-dependent resource” is a core term in the proposed rule that is 
not defined. USEPA leaves unknown whether that term refers to wildlife that spends its 
life in water or if it is broad enough to encompass every bird and mammal that uses 
surface water at some point throughout its lifecycle, including for drinking. The notice of 
the proposed rule refers repeatedly to fish and wild rice, but that does not address what 
else falls under this rule and how far-reaching it could extend. 
Similarly, identifying the “unsuppressed level” of a heritage use leaves many 
ambiguities surrounding the process, including additional undefined terms that will only 
add to problems with interpretation and implementation. EGLE has concerns over terms 
like “currently reasonably achievable” and the notion of certain issues as not “feasible” 
to address, seeming to offer a potential off-ramp or redefining of unsuppressed levels. 
Hydrology changes and legacy contaminants are both examples of factors that may not 
be feasible to address through water quality standards. They also highlight additional 
concerns over the practical difficulties in implementation when both conditions are 
potentially highly relevant to the focus on fish consumption and wild rice rights noted 
throughout the preamble. 
USEPA should consider adding significantly clearer and more extensive language to 
expand the process for determining unsuppressed levels of rights. It is important to 
include clear distinctions between heritage use and unsuppressed level, and also to 
explain how far-reaching the agency’s intent is when using terms like achievability “in 
the future.” Further, USEPA should explain what conditions it considers to be not 
feasible and how those conditions are reflected under a proposed rule that water quality 
standards must be established to protect unsuppressed rights. 
Within the context of the proposed rule, providing definitions and the intent behind the 
terms “feasible” and “achievable” are particularly relevant when considering legacy 
contaminants and atmospheric deposition. Legacy contaminants and atmospheric 
deposition are largely the reason for broad fish-consumption-restriction 
recommendations in Michigan. But, because of the ambiguity in the terms USEPA uses 
in the proposed rule, it remains unclear whether these are conditions considered not 
“feasible” to address. The examples USEPA gives also leave the answer to this 
feasibility question unclear. 
A lack of feasible near-term options makes sense for these long-term legacy issues. But 
then it is difficult to understand where practical gains in fish consumption levels and 
rights advances in increased consumption of fish will be realized. While the theory of 
protecting greater consumption rates makes sense, the practical application of the 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 10 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
proposed rule to water quality conditions that are arguably not “feasible” results in 
unlikely practical advances in realization of tribal reserved rights. Similarly, USEPA has 
provided no basis to understand how the unsuppressed use of natural resources it 
seeks to protect differs from the existing designated use to protect wildlife and fish in 
§ 303(2)(A) of the federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1313(2)(A). 
 
The proposed rule fails to offer adequate examples for 
implementation. 
USEPA offers three options for protecting tribal reserved rights, including: 
• Adopting designated uses that recognize and identify tribal reserved right; 
• Adopting criteria protective of tribal reserved rights under existing designated 
uses; or 
• Utilizing anti-degradation policies (including designating waters as outstanding 
state resources) to comply with the proposed rule. 
While USEPA may believe it is offering states flexibility by offering  these options they 
remain vague, particularly in areas where state jurisdiction and tribal reserved rights 
overlap. These options are likely to create significant issues in the Great Lakes basin 
and increase regulatory uncertainty that states, tribes, the public and the regulated 
community face. 
Further, Michigan is a riparian rights state with abundant water and aquatic resources 
and water quality standards set according to guidance specific to the Great Lakes basin. 
In contrast, many states with tribal communities are located in the arid west and operate 
within a prior appropriation system of water rights. The issues involving water quality 
and aquatic resource availability in Michigan can be very different from other states. 
USEPA has provided no examples that illustrate how a state like Michigan could 
implement any of these options and achieve the sort of feasible improvement the 
proposed rule would require. 
 
The proposed rule appears to be poorly integrated with USEPA’s 
future rulemaking. 
USEPA has suggested for many years that it will be adopting baseline water quality 
standards for inside of Indian country. Presumably, USEPA will adopt standards it 
believes will protect tribal reserved rights inside of Indian country. But USEPA suggests 
that this proposed rule would apply both inside and outside of Indian country without 
explaining how it would work with future baseline water quality standards. For States 
like Michigan, which have more checkerboarded trust lands than consolidated Indian 
reservations with defined external boundaries, this is critical information that it should 
have in hand so it can give comprehensive comments on this proposed rule. 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 11 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
 
The proposed rule improperly attempts to impose a new nationwide 
environmental servitude on all Indian treaties, statutes, executive orders, 
and other federal authority without supporting legal authority. 
One of the central features of USEPA’s proposed rule is the requirement that water 
quality standards protect “unsuppressed” uses of aquatic and aquatic-dependent 
resources. In USEPA’s view, tribal rights reserved under Indian treaties, statutes, 
executive orders, and other federal authority require all states to maximize the amount 
of the natural resources available to those who exercise the tribal reserved rights. 
But there is no case law holding that states must adopt water quality standards to 
achieve that end, i.e., maximizing available resources for tribes to satisfy their reserved 
rights. Nor has USEPA identified any scientific data that demonstrates going through 
the process of identifying water quality at a particular period in history would be possible 
or that adopting water quality standards to reflect historical levels would lead to 
maximizing the available resources. Instead, to adopt unsuppressed uses as a goal, the 
agency relies on the Ninth Circuit’s decision in what is known as the Culverts Case, 
United States v. Washington, 853 F.3d 946 (9th Cir. 2017), aff’d by an equally divided 
court 138 S.Ct. 1832 (2018). Yet, there are many reasons why the Culverts Case does 
not support the proposed rule. 
 
The Culverts Case does not address water quality standards and 
does not endorse the concept of a general environmental duty or 
servitude. 
The Culverts Case does not substantively address water quality standards. Rather, it is 
one small part of more than fifty years of litigation concerning the fishing rights that 
tribes living in the Pacific northwest reserved to themselves in land cession treaties their 
ancestors signed in 1854 and 1855 (the Stevens Treaties). See Washington, 853 F.3d 
at 953–54, 958–60. In 2001, twenty-one tribes claimed that the State of Washington 
was violating the Stevens Treaties by building barrier culverts that harmed salmon in a 
variety of ways that decreased the tribal harvest. See id.at 954, 960. Nothing in the 
decisions by the courts in that case imposed on Washington any duty to improve water 
quality to maximize the availability of fish to catch, much less to return water quality 
standards to what they were in the 1850s when the tribes signed the Stevens Treaties. 
Further, the Culverts Case decision did not endorse a general environmental duty or 
environmental servitude to prevent pollution of water resources as a treaty obligation. 
The United States had sought to establish a generalized environmental duty in an 
earlier phase of litigation involving the Stevens Treaties, but the courts rejected its 
claim. Washington, 853 F.3d at 959. As the Ninth Circuit explained, the “environmental 
issue” was “too broad and varied to be resolved in a general and undifferentiated 
fashion, and that the issue of human-caused environmental degradation must be 
resolved in the context of particularized disputes.” Id. (emphasis added). The federal 
courts only waded into the barrier culverts issue years later because it was a narrower 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 12 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
issue with particularized facts concerning a single state, single type of problem, and 
single type of natural resource (fish). See Id. at 961. 
But USEPA’s proposed rule attempts to establish a general environmental duty for fifty 
states plus additional territories, 574 tribes, 370 treaties, and countless statutes, 
executive orders, and other federal authority in a single rule concerning an unknown 
range of natural resources and without any specific facts to consider. The narrow 
reasoning the Ninth Circuit adopted to reach the barrier culverts issue does not support 
adopting this broad proposed rule. 
 
The Culverts Case involved a true Indian understanding analysis, 
which the proposed rule does not include. 
Nor can USEPA rely on the Culverts Case as authority for the process it prescribes for 
determining tribal reserved rights. From all appearances, USEPA intends for the 
proposed rule to fast-track or shorten the analysis that determines whether a treaty, 
statute, or executive order reserves rights because there is a very short statutory 
timeline for developing water quality standards. The review in § 303(c) occurs every 
three years. 33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(1). USEPA has only sixty days to review a state’s 
proposed water quality standards, with an additional ninety days to specify the new 
water quality standards if the agency does not approve the state’s proposed standards. 
33 U.S.C. § 1313(c)(3). 
But the Ninth Circuit did not suggest that there is any shortcut around a traditional treaty 
analysis that considers historical and anthropological evidence to get at the Indian 
understanding of a treaty if its plain language is ambiguous. Instead, the courts in the 
Culverts Case conducted a traditional Indian understanding analysis. That analysis, 
which involved work by experts, considered aspects of the trade language the tribes 
spoke, statements made by the Indian delegates to the treaty council, and assurances 
made by federal representatives. Washington, 853 F.3d at 963–64. 
Perhaps Washington already had the materials and experts they needed for the treaty 
arguments regarding barrier culverts due to its decades of litigation. But other states, 
including Michigan, would have to start at the beginning when analyzing the treaties, 
statutes, and executive orders within the scope of the proposed rule, regardless of what 
conclusion it might reach on the existence of tribal reserved rights. There is very little 
likelihood that the type of research and analysis the Ninth Circuit relied on in the 
Culverts Case would fit within USEPA’s abbreviated timeline. And nothing in the 
Culverts Case or other case law would excuse USEPA and the states from doing that 
hard work. 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 13 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
 
The Culverts Case does not support the proposed rule because it is 
not precedent. 
Even if there were some persuasive reasoning in the Ninth Circuit’s decision in the 
Culverts Case supporting of the proposed rule, that decision is not precedent on which 
USEPA can rely. While the USEPA suggested that the United States Supreme Court 
had “aff’d” (meaning affirmed) the Ninth Circuit’s decision, that is not true. 87 Fed. Reg. 
74,363, n.13. The Supreme Court issued a per curiam opinion in which it stated that the 
“judgment is affirmed by an equally divided Court.” Washington, 138 S.Ct. at 1832. 
Affirming a lower court decision and affirming it by an equally divided court are two 
different judicial results. 
As the Supreme Court itself explained more than a century ago: 
Under the precedents of this court, and, as seems justified by reason as 
well as by authority, an affirmance by an equally divided court is, as 
between the parties, a conclusive determination and adjudication of the 
matter adjudged; but the principles of law involved not having been agreed 
upon by a majority of the court sitting prevents the case from becoming an 
authority for the determination of other cases, either in this or in inferior 
courts.” 
Hertz v. Woodman, 218 U.S. 205, 213–14, (1910) (emphasis added). In short, a 
majority of Supreme Court justices did not agree that the Ninth Circuit correctly 
decided the Culverts Case nor that it erred, which means it is not binding 
authority on anyone other than the parties. 
 
USEPA has not considered any of the authority adverse to the 
proposed rule. 
USEPA has also seemingly failed to consider any of the case law that is adverse to its 
proposition that treaties and all other sources of federal law that reserve rights to natural 
resources include an environmental servitude that extends to water quality standards. 
See, e.g., Menominee Indian Tribe of Wisconsin v. Thompson, 922 F. Supp. 184 (W.D. 
Wis. 1996), aff’d, 161 F.3d 449 (7th Cir. 1998). 
The problem that the tribe in Menominee, and now the USEPA, is attempting to fix is not 
one that case law in this context supports. As the district court in Menominee explained: 
The interference with plaintiff's [sturgeon] harvest comes not from other 
fishers but from the encroachment of industry, commerce and residential 
development that are the accompaniments of the westward expansion of 
European settlement and economic growth. In this respect, this case is 
like cases in which other tribes have sought to articulate a right to an 
environmental servitude that would require states to protect fishing 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 14 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
habitats from environmental degradation. Although a number of 
commentators have advanced the idea that such a right should be 
recognized in order to protect treaty fishing rights, … the concept has not 
fared well in the courts. 
Menominee, 922 F. Supp. at 215–16 (emphasis added and internal citations omitted). 
The district court in Menominee went on to discuss the cases where the parties sought 
to counter the effects of environmental degradation on the availability of fish. 
Menominee, 922 F. Supp. at 216. It concluded that the cases did not require ensuring 
that more resources were available to tribes so that they could increase their catch; the 
cases merely required reallocating the share of the existing catch so that the treaty 
fishers could obtain their fair share of the harvest. Id. Suffice it to say, an administrative 
rule that governs water quality is completely unrelated to reallocating the shares of a 
harvest and outside the scope of USEPA’s authority under the federal Clean Water Act. 
The district court in Menominee also concluded that there are only two potential 
remedies if a tribe loses a “guaranteed usufructuary right.” Menominee, 922 F. Supp. at 
216. The tribe could seek “monetary compensation for the lost opportunity from 
Congress, the Court of Claims, or the now-defunct Indian Claims Commission[.]” Id. 
That remedy holds the United States responsible for the promises it made in a treaty, 
statute, executive order, or other federal authority. Alternatively, the tribe could “sue for 
an injunction preventing the construction of a dam or other obstruction or requiring that 
it be removed.” Id. That remedy guarantees the rights holder physical access to the 
resource. See, e.g., United States v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371, 381–82 (1905) (Yakima 
Indians were entitled to cross private lands to enjoy their treaty-reserved right to fish, 
which had been contemplated when the treaty was negotiated); Winters v. United 
States, 207 U.S. 564, 565 (1908) (non-Indians upstream of the Fort Belknap 
Reservation were barred from diverting water flowage in the Milk River because it 
denied the tribes residing on the reservation access to the irrigation water they needed 
and subverted the purposes of the treaty that reserved the Indian reservation). 
But USEPA’s proposed regulation does not fit in either category of remedy or 
meet the aims of either remedy. USEPA is not authorizing claims against the 
United States, which it could not do. Nor is it granting injunctive relief in a specific 
set of facts where access to a natural resource has been blocked. Further, for 
states in the Great Lakes region with separate water quality standards guidance 
from the rest of the country, it is questionable whether stricter and less obtainable 
water quality standards (e.g., for a widespread contaminant like mercury) will 
make a positive difference for tribal reserved rights at all. 
Finally, USEPA has failed to consider one of the bedrock principles of the Indian 
canons of construction that is adverse to what it seeks to accomplish with the 
proposed rule:  modern decisionmakers cannot change the historical bargains 
struck between the United States and Indian tribes, even to achieve laudable 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 15 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
goals. As the Supreme Court has said, “[C]ourts cannot ignore plain language 
that, viewed in historical context and given a fair appraisal, clearly runs counter to 
a tribe's later claims.” Oregon Dep’t of Fish & Wildlife v. Klamath Indian Tribe, 
473 U.S. 753, 774 (1985) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). That 
principle builds on earlier precedent, including Choctaw Nation of Indians v. 
United States, 318 U.S. 423, 432 (1943), in which the Supreme Court explained, 
“Indian treaties cannot be re-written or expanded beyond their clear terms to 
remedy a claimed injustice or to achieve the asserted understanding of the 
parties.” See also Confederated Bands of Ute Indians v. United States, 330 U.S. 
169, 179 (1947) (“[W]e cannot, under the guise of interpretation, create 
Presidential authority where there was none, nor rewrite congressional acts so as 
to make them mean something they obviously were not intended to mean.”). In 
short, “Times change and people change, but treaties do not.” Menominee, 
161 F.3d at 462–63 (Wood, J., concurring). 
Clearly, USEPA is attempting to address modern problems facing Indian tribes 
and other indigenous people, like climate change. See 87 Fed. Reg. 74,366. But 
it cannot provide that help by ignoring the unique Indian understanding of 
individual treaties, statutes, and executive orders to establish a broad, nationally 
uniform right to certain actions involving water quality standards. Many of today’s 
pressing issues would have been entirely foreign both to the federal and 
indigenous negotiators of the treaties, statutes, and executive orders that 
reserved rights to aquatic resources in the eighteenth, nineteenth, and first part 
of the twentieth century. 
It is tempting to think that stretching those authorities to address water quality is 
permissible because it may benefit tribal and indigenous communities. But that is 
not a permissible way to interpret treaties, statutes, and executive orders 
reserving rights and certainly not something that Congress endorsed when it 
enacted § 511(a)(3). 
 
The details of the proposed rule are unworkable. 
The general vagueness and lack of detail in the proposed rule leaves EGLE with great 
concern for how USEPA will implement the rule if it is promulgated. There are significant 
concerns over USEPA’s undefined expectations (e.g., does the reserved rights analysis 
occur once or in every triennial review?) and timeframe necessary to adequately 
incorporate this rule into the triennial review process given the level of effort this will 
require. 
Scientists and program experts who work in federal Clean Water Act programs lack the 
expertise, understanding, and historical context on tribal rights to carry out the 
obligations in this proposed rule. They have every reason to be concerned about the 
distinction between identifying safe levels of pollutants to protect uses, which is within 
the scope of what they do, and guaranteeing the availability of those resources, which is 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 16 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
not part of their responsibilities. The definitions critical to understanding the proposed 
rule and its implementation are highly subjective and ultimately lacking. 
 
USEPA would better protect tribal reserved rights if it focused on 
states’ existing water quality authorities, such as site-specific 
standards.  
USEPA would lend more assistance to tribes and other rights holders seeking to protect 
their reserved rights if the agency focused on authorities that currently exist rather than 
promulgating the proposed rule requiring state staff trained in water quality and 
environmental protection to interpret treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other 
unnamed federal authority. For example, in keeping with 40 C.F.R. Part 132, Michigan’s 
Part 4 Water Quality Standards, Mich. Admin. Code R. (“Rule”) 323.1041 et seq., allow 
site-specific water quality values to be derived for toxic substances under Rule 
323.1057. The rule allows the site-specific standard to reflect localized environmental 
conditions that might affect aquatic life or wildlife values. See Rule 323.1057(2)(r) and 
Rule 323.1057(3)(n). It also allows the standard to reflect localized environmental 
conditions or human exposure in developing human health values. See Rule 
323.1057(4)(h). These authorities, which are aimed at protecting both natural resources 
and the humans who use them or are exposed to them, already exist in Michigan 
without any further action by USEPA. 
USEPA should review state rules to determine which states have this legal authority to 
adopt site-specific standards. If that authority does not exist in some states, it may 
consider recommending rule updates that would allow states to develop site-specific 
criteria to address the tribal communities and the resources that USEPA seeks to 
protect with this proposed rule. The agency can also provide guidance to states on how 
to solicit and navigate tribal requests for site-specific standards, as well as supply 
additional funding and guidance to tribes so that they can effectively participate in these 
existing frameworks for addressing their individual problems or needs. 
To date, EGLE has not received any formal submittal from a tribe to develop site-
specific criteria. This is likely an issue related to a lack of awareness of site-specific 
water quality standards as an available option, as well as the limited staff capacity that 
tribes have to utilize this opportunity. Unfortunately, the proposed rule overlooks site-
specific standards while also failing to raise tribal awareness of site-specific standards 
or to enhance the tribal staff capacity to advocate for their needs with state regulators. 
This is truly a missed opportunity. 
 
There may be no relationship between water quality standards and 
the availability of resources. 
The proposed rule conflates the notion of identifying water quality standards that are 
protective of tribal reserved rights with that of ‘availability’ of aquatic and aquatic-
dependent resources. This pushes the proposed rule outside the bounds of the federal 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 17 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
Clean Water Act and the state regulators who implement it into the roles and 
responsibilities of other state agencies, at best. While work developing appropriate 
water quality standards to provide supportive conditions for various uses is expected 
under the federal Clean Water Act, the ‘availability’ of those aquatic and aquatic-
dependent resources is often dictated by issues beyond water quality. 
For example, the Great Lakes basin has experienced significant shifts in the availability 
of historic resources due to the irreversible changes that come with millions of additional 
people living on the landscape and the results of their impacts and decisions, including:   
• Widespread land use changes through forestry; 
• Agricultural, residential, commercial, and industrial development practices; 
• Invasive species;  
• Species loss and exotic replacement, e.g., extensive long-term stocking of pacific 
and European salmonids; 
• Stock management decisions by fish and game agencies; and 
• Broad fish and wildlife consumption restrictions based on historic and/or 
atmospheric deposition of bioaccumulative chemicals that come from within and 
outside the region. 
Tying protective water quality standards to the availability of a resource inappropriately 
links the federal Clean Water Act’s tools to practical realities that are beyond its scope. 
 
USEPA does not use sound scientific principles when it merely 
assumes that waterbodies historically had better quality and that 
those conditions are still achievable in all cases. 
USEPA’s proposed rule idealizes the historical quality of waters of the United States, 
even during eras when human uses were unregulated, and no treatment was available. 
It has not cited a single scientific study that suggests that water quality in the 
eighteenth, nineteenth, and early twentieth century was uniformly pristine across the 
country. It has not considered the types and locations of historical industry and other 
impacts to resources. It has not attempted to identify the historical events involving the 
negative impacts to the availability of natural resources that forced some indigenous 
people to enter into treaties or other agreements. Nor has it pointed to a study that 
demonstrates a correlation between the time a treaty, statute, or executive order 
becomes effective and the maximum availability of an aquatic or aquatic-dependent 
resource. In short, there may have been better times in history for the availability of 
aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources for tribes with reserved rights, but the 
proposed rule has not found a scientific way to locate that time or pinpoint those places. 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 18 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
Even more importantly, it is highly questionable that adopting any particular water 
quality standards would achieve historical conditions for many aquatic and aquatic-
dependent resources, at least within any reasonable timeframe. The changes that have 
occurred over time that affect water quality are, to a significant extent, beyond USEPA’s 
ability to fix with this proposed rule. Species loss, exotic species replacement, invasive 
species, permanently altered hydrology and connectivity such as land use changes, 
dams, climate change related precipitation changes, and legacy and atmospheric 
contamination all have significant implications for meeting historical targets that may no 
longer be possible, even with appropriate water quality standards. The proposed rule 
does little to acknowledge the practical application of a changed environment when 
aspiring to regain historical conditions. 
 
The proposed rule would impose substantial and unwarranted 
burdens on states. 
EGLE expects the proposed rule’s broad application could be particularly burdensome 
on states and their program staff who develop water quality standards. A wide range of 
issues make this proposed rule more burdensome than other regulations, including: 
• Program staff’s lack of expertise in tribal treaty rights and historical matters, 
particularly within a water quality standards program context; 
• The difficulty vetting and understanding potential reserved rights and their 
historical context; 
• The challenge of translating historical observations about aquatic and aquatic-
dependent resources into actionable data; 
• The effort to clarify meaningful water quality conditions that may be impactful; 
• The complexity of identifying the gap in water quality standards needed to 
support aspirational targets; and  
• The procedures states must follow to propose water quality standard changes. 
The impact this proposed rule will have on states will extend beyond a rule-making 
process. States like Michigan with multiple tribes, many different treaties, 
unconsolidated Indian country, jurisdictional overlap with tribes and other states, and 
the myriad of unknowns discussed earlier in this letter make moving forward in a 
meaningful way under the proposed rule extremely difficult. 
Additionally, the USEPA’s Economic Analysis is inadequate in its potential reflection of 
the coordination efforts between states and tribes if the intent is to have a thorough, 
meaningful, respectful, accurate process that results in change. Similarly, although the 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 19 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
impacts of the proposed rulemaking are uncertain on regulated entities, it is critical to 
acknowledge that there will be an impact and it may be significant. 
 
The proposed rule will lead to unnecessary litigation or conflict between 
tribes and states. 
EGLE finds itself in a very difficult position with this proposed rule. On the one hand, 
Michigan is working toward a better relationship with Indian tribes concerning water and 
aquatic resources. Michigan also has a markedly different approach to reserved rights 
than it had in the past. For instance, in December 2022, Michigan joined the United 
States and four out of five tribes with treaty-reserved usufructuary rights under the 1836 
Treaty of Washington to propose a new consent decree concerning fishing in the Great 
Lakes, which would have been unthinkable just a few decades ago. 
On the other hand, the triennial review process leaves such little time to address 
reserved rights that it seems inevitable that at least some states will be forced to 
challenge aspects of the proposed rule simply to be able to resolve the reserved rights 
issues consistently with controlling authority. Alternatively, states may be forced to 
consider challenges to the rule to be able to abide by legally binding agreements, 
including ones under state law, that control tribal—state relations regarding reserved 
rights to natural resources. 
The prospect of litigation is counterproductive; it simply diverts tribal, state, and federal 
resources from protecting water and aquatic resources and forces these governments 
to battle with each other. EGLE has searched the proposed rule to find some alternative 
that would allow federal, tribal, and state sovereigns to find common ground with 
respect to how water quality standards can and should be used to protect tribal 
communities and indigenous people generally, even where they disagree on the 
question of reserved rights. For instance, an option for developing a reasonable plan to 
identify reserved rights, flexibility in setting standards, or the ability to take interim or 
transitional steps. But no such provisions exist in the rule, which suggests that this 
proposed rule may seek to protect reserved rights, but it may ultimately fail to protect 
people and aquatic resources, or at least unnecessarily delay what is possible to 
implement in return for resolving historical questions. And in the process, states may not 
only challenge USEPA, but tribes will be forced to intervene to be able to defend what 
they believe are their reserved rights. This lack of any viable alternatives to litigation to 
resolve disputes is a critical deficiency in the proposed rule and one that must be 
corrected. 
And to be clear, it is not legally adequate for USEPA to become the final arbiter of the 
reserved rights issue. Due to its federal trust responsibilities, USEPA is not qualified to 
act as a neutral decision maker, particularly in an area in which it has no expertise. 
Moreover, USEPA must be aware that the details of this proposed rule have not gone 
through the discussion and vetting with states that it deserves so that it remains within 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 20 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
the scope of the agency’s statutory authority and has had some of its least workable 
features fixed. Notably, when EGLE staff have talked to USEPA staff about the 
proposed rule, they have had no answers to key questions. Even USEPA knows it is 
missing key pieces of information, which is why it solicits more information on several 
topics in the public notice. These and other problems are only compounded by the fact 
that USEPA rushed to publish its public notice, allowing only ninety days for public 
comment even though the first thirty days of the comment period were at the end of the 
year, when many state and tribal employees are away from the office. Had USEPA 
engaged with the states on the details of the rule it was contemplating or allowed more 
time for comment, EGLE may have been able to provide more targeted comments that 
could have helped avoid the many problems in the proposed rule. 
 
Conclusion 
At the beginning of this letter, EGLE suggested that USEPA not pursue this rule and 
should, instead, take three steps. Those steps are better calculated to improving the 
challenging water quality issues that tribes face within the scope of authority that the 
federal Clean Water Act provides USEPA. 
First, EGLE would look forward to partnering with USEPA Region 5 and Michigan tribes 
to identify the water quality issues that tribal communities face in the state and that can 
be addressed under existing authority, such as site-specific standards. There are likely 
other opportunities for EGLE and Michigan tribes to partner with other Great Lakes 
states and tribes to capitalize on each other’s experiences and ideas to find solutions to 
pressing problems without delay. 
Second, USEPA should seek amendments to the federal Clean Water Act to obtain the 
authority to address modern and emerging threats to tribal communities. If USEPA 
works closely with both tribes and states, USEPA will stand the best chance of 
determining what is truly lawful, workable, and helpful for the long-term protection of 
tribal communities and their water quality needs. 
Finally, USEPA should develop a far narrower rule or guidance that provides a 
framework for USEPA’s staff to assess and respond to evidence in the 60/90-day 
process that water quality standards in a particular state violate specific tribal reserved 
rights to avoid any conflict between the federal Clean Water Act and a treaty or other 
binding federal law. Because the other steps that EGLE proposes deal with both 
immediate and long-term goals for protecting water quality, aquatic resources, and tribal 
communities, this narrower rule can be faithful to the Indian canons of construction and 
the prohibition against altering treaties without risking that tribal water quality issues will 
remain unremedied. 
 

SUBJECT:  Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
USEPA’s Proposed Tribal Reserved Rights Rule 
Page 21 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
Should you have any questions concerning this letter or EGLE’s proposed approach, 
please do not hesitate to contact Kevin Goodwin; Lakes Erie, Huron, and Superior Unit; 
Surface Water Assessment Section; WRD; at 517-290-4198; GoodwinK@Michigan.gov; 
or EGLE, P.O. Box 30458, Lansing, Michigan 48909-7958. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
        
 
 
Teresa Seidel, Director 
Water Resources Division 
517-284-5470 
 
cc:  
Stephen Jann, USEPA, Region 5 
Robert P. Reichel, Michigan Department of Attorney General (MDAG) 
Polly A. Synk, MDAG 
Jaclyn Shoshana Levine, MDAG 
Daniel Eichinger, Acting Director, EGLE 
Aaron Keatley, Chief Deputy Director, EGLE 
Katie Lambeth, Environmental Justice and Tribal Liaison, EGLE 
Phil Argiroff, EGLE 
Christine Alexander, EGLE 
Michael Alexander, EGLE 
Kevin Goodwin, EGLE 
Amanda Bosak, EGLE

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0254 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center, Room 3334 
1301 Constitution Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20004 
 
RE:  Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
(Docket#: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791)  
 
Please accept the following comments from the Center for Biological Diversity (“Center”) on the 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) revisions to Water Quality Standards (“WQS”) to 
protect tribal reserved rights. These long overdue revisions affirm that the EPA has a broader 
authority to set WQS than previously acknowledged, and the agency must leverage this authority 
to protect culturally important and imperiled aquatic animal and plant species, such as salmon, 
the Clear Lake hitch, and the tule plant. 
 
We generally support the EPA’s revisions to protect tribal reserved rights as well as its 
acknowledgement that tribes hold many such rights “within and outside their reservation 
boundaries.” By proposing these regulations, the EPA seems to acknowledge its broad authority 
to set WQS in a way that pushes the envelope, and we encourage it to continue down this path 
and make sure the revisions are appropriately implemented to protect species nationwide. If 
anything, these revisions mean that the EPA must be more protective of endangered, imperiled, 
and culturally significant aquatic species throughout their range.  
 
Water quality issues are suppressing water-dependent species that indigenous peoples rely upon 
for cultural, spiritual, and economic purposes. For example, salmon are a culturally significant 
species for many Pacific Northwest Tribes, who are, by treaty, entitled to collect a moderate 
amount of coho and Chinook salmon in “usual and accustomed areas,” but range wide, degraded 
and impaired water quality threatens both the existence of the salmon and the way of life of the 
Tribes.1 In another example, the Clear Lake hitch is a culturally significant species for various 
Pomo Tribes surrounding Clear Lake, California, who have depended on the Clear Lake hitch for 
sustenance for generations, but now, the effects of water pollution in the watershed and toxic 
algal blooms in the lake have pushed the sacred minnow to the edge of extinction.2 As a third 
example, the Pomo Tribes around Clear Lake also rely on the tule plant as a material to make 
clothes, shelter, baskets, and boats, but high levels of mercury in Clear Lake put tribal members 
at higher risk of mouth cancer and dental issues—the cultural practice of basketry involves 
placing the tule reed into the mouth.3 This is why EPA must set water quality standards as 
 
1 U.S. DOI, Fishing Rights of the Yurok and Hoopa Valley Tribes (Oct. 4, 1993) 
https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.opengov.ibmcloud.com/files/uploads/M-36979.compressed.pdf;  
2 Jeanine Pfeiffer, The Fight for the Invisible Fish THE REVELATOR (May 23, 2022) https://therevelator.org/fight-
save-invisible-fish/ 
3 Jules Tavernier and the Elem Pomo (Aug. 4, 2021) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pnUJNcviI0g 

2 
 
protective as possible of water quality to support tribal reserved water rights as well as the 
culturally and biologically important aquatic species that are at risk by rampant water pollution. 
 
I. 
The WQS Provide the EPA with Broader Authority Than Previously Recognized to 
Protect Water Quality 
 
We generally support the EPA’s assertion that Section 303(c) of the Clean Water Act (“CWA”) 
must be broadly read, necessitating the protection of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water 
quality or water availability. We also support the EPA’s inclusion of additional definitions and 
clarification in the regulations to define tribal reserved rights and ensure that tribes are protected 
to the same risk level as the general population. Given that the EPA has previously asserted that 
it was “unnecessary” to protect tribal reserved rights and that states could already protect tribal 
reserved rights under existing regulations, the EPA is right to explicitly acknowledge that the 
WQS can be used to protect tribal reserved rights.  
 
As the EPA notes, “protection of such rights falls within the ambit of these broad statutory 
directions and objectives” of the CWA.4 The CWA’s structure, objectives, and discretion 
afforded to the EPA provide ample room to consider and give effect to all applicable reserved 
rights. While protecting tribal reserved rights is a critical step to “restore and maintain the 
chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the Nation’s waters,” the proposed revisions 
clearly indicate that the EPA has a broader authority to set water quality standards than 
previously acknowledged or exerted.  
 
There are other situations where the EPA has implied that existing regulations are adequate to 
protect an interest where an explicit clarification is warranted. Despite regulations requiring that 
the EPA ensure WQS are protective of endangered and threatened species, the EPA has a history 
of failing to consult with expert wildlife agencies to ensure that any changes do not jeopardize 
the species.5 Many pollutants with identified impacts to endangered species have been revised 
without consultation.6 The WQS program is one of the only ways to avoid piecemeal destruction 
of species and habitat, and the EPA should endeavor to use this program to proactively conserve 
species.  
 
II. 
The Proposed Rule Necessitates Revising Water Quality Criteria to Protect Listed 
Salmon Throughout their Range. 
 
In the Pacific Northwest, treaties explicitly reserved for many tribes the right to fish in their 
“usual and accustomed” fishing grounds and stations both within and outside their reservation 
boundaries.7 Salmon have sustained indigenous peoples for thousands of years, and many tribes 
 
4 Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 at 15 
(Nov. 28, 2022). 
5 EPA Weakens Water Quality Standards for Harmful Selenium (July 12, 2016) 
https://www.biologicaldiversity.org/news/press_releases/2016/selenium-pollution-07-12-2016.html 
6 Legal Action Launched to Strengthen Water Quality in Vermont, New Hampshire, Maine, Connecticut (Oct. 26, 
2016) https://www.biologicaldiversity.org/news/press_releases/2016/water-quality-standards-10-26-2016.html 
7 U.S. DOI, Fishing Rights of the Yurok and Hoopa Valley Tribes at 23. 

3 
 
depend on salmon spiritually, culturally, and economically.8 Salmon are also a dietary staple, 
putting tribal members at greater risk of harm when eating fish laden with toxic chemicals that 
bioaccumulate in salmon.9 While many populations of salmon like coho and Chinook salmon 
that Northwest tribes traditionally relied upon are now listed as threatened, authorized tribes in 
certain situations can continue to collect listed salmon without violating take prohibitions 
adopted under section 9 of the Endangered Species Act (“ESA”).10 Listed Chinook salmon “are 
harvested intentionally and incidentally” under harvest management plans that significantly 
restrict time and place of operation while putting a premium on recovering the species.11 
 
The EPA envisions two situations where WQS may need to be adjusted – human health criteria 
in recognition of fish consumption and where a reserved right is not accounted for, but could 
appear in the future as a result of restoration efforts. After 25 years, the EPA finally restored 
quintessential human health criteria that accounted for indigenous communities’ increased fish 
consumption. However, the aquatic life criteria – a critical metric necessary to protect the 
abundance of salmon – has not been updated since 1986. Since the purpose of these revisions is 
to ensure “the exercise of the tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability 
of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource,” it makes sense to consider situations where 
aquatic life criteria must be adjusted to protect culturally important resources like salmon. 
Availability of fish is also something the EPA specifically notes that it will consider in 
determining whether a right is suppressed. 
 
Protecting the right to fish in the “usual and accustomed areas” also implicates updated 
protections that consider the entire range of the salmon. Most Pacific salmonids are anadromous, 
migrating from the ocean upstream to the freshwater streams of their birth, growing through six 
basic life history stages, each with a different chemical sensitivity. Therefore, an aquatic life 
criteria that just focuses on adult salmon in the ocean would fail to consider stream-bound fry or 
eggs in gravel beds. Criteria that consider range-wide pollutants and the life-history of the 
salmon are critical to ensuring the recovery of these species as well as the unsuppressed right to 
fish at usual and accustomed areas both on and off reservation. Through consultation with the 
National Marine Fisheries Service, the EPA could realize these protections. 
 
The Northwest tribes have always been strong advocates of fish and wildlife, having repeatedly 
restrained harvest while maintaining and monitoring fisheries in the interest of conservation. 
These efforts will be negated, and tribal reserved rights suppressed, if the EPA does not improve 
the aquatic life criteria. 
 
 
 
 
8 Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission, Questions and Answers on Tribal Salmon Fisheries 
https://nwifc.org/about-us/fisheries-management/questions-and-answers-on-tribal-salmon-fisheries/#gsc.tab=0 
9 Chairman Ed Johnstone, Being Frank: Water Quality Protection Is Headed in The Right Direction Northwest 
Treaty Tribes (Dec. 20, 2022). 
10 Limitation on Section 9 Protections Applicable to Salmon and Steelhead Listed as Threatened under the 
Endangered Species Act (ESA), for Actions Under Tribal Resource Management Plans 65 Fed. Reg 42481 (July 10, 
2000) 
11 Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission, Salmon Fisheries Management Under the ESA, https://nwifc.org/about-
us/fisheries-management/salmon-fisheries-management-under-the-esa/#gsc.tab=0 

4 
 
III. 
WQS Must Ensure the Health of the Clear Lake Hitch.  
 
The Clear Lake hitch is a large minnow found only in Clear Lake and its tributaries. The hitch 
has strong cultural significance for several indigenous Pomo tribes of the Clear Lake region that 
rely on the hitch (or “chi”) for spiritual purposes, traditions, and as a primary food source.12 
Historically, the hitch likely numbered in the millions, but the species has plummeted so far in 
recent years that extinction is a distinct possibility if swift action is not taken.  
 
Clear Lake is the largest freshwater lake named to the California list of impaired water bodies. 
The water has been polluted historically and contains remnant toxic pesticides and mercury from 
a nearby superfund site, while unfettered agricultural runoff causes harmful algal blooms that 
suffocate the lake and shut down recreation and cultural practices.13 The tribes have led the way 
on water quality monitoring around the lake to track ecotoxicology, but they expect and rely on 
the federal government to carry out its responsibilities in managing the land, water, and 
wildlife.14 Four species of culturally significant fish – fish found nowhere else in the world – 
have already been pushed to extinction in the area. The Clear Lake hitch is fifth on the chopping 
block, and while the state of California listed the minnow as threatened in 2014, the hitch is on 
such a steep decline that tribes have requested emergency protections under the federal 
Endangered Species Act. 
 
President Biden has acknowledged that Indigenous Knowledge is to be considered in policy and 
agency decision making, and the EPA encourages the consideration and incorporation of any 
Indigenous Knowledge that is freely provided by the tribes.15 While EPA’s proposed WQS 
rulemaking purports to benefit tribes by improving the ability to maintain traditions and reduce 
health risks, the agency cannot do so unless it actually incorporate such knowledge in its water 
quality standards. Many tribes in the area are federally recognized tribes experienced with 
federally reserved water rights, and the EPA cannot ignore the history and connection to the 
hitch when it is given a chance to in this rulemaking.  
 
Jesse Gonzalez, vice chair of Scotts Valley Band of Pomo Indians recalls catching chi as a young 
boy, but fears that “future generations will never have that opportunity.”16 The Pomo tribes of 
the Clear Lake have a right to collect and consumer this fish unsuppressed by water quality, and 
the EPA should make every effort to protect this right. 
 
IV. 
WQS Must Account for Traditional Uses of the Tule Plant to Protect Indigenous 
Health. 
 
12 Cal. Water Boards, Clear Lake Hitch https://www.waterboards.ca.gov/waterrights/water_issues/programs/clear-
lake-hitch/ 
13 Dr. Jeanine Pfeiffer, The Language of Silence: How Ecocide and Genocide Intersect on California’s Largest Lake 
FRAGILITY (July 18, 2022) 
14 Emergency Endangered Species Act Protections Sought for the Clear Lake Hitch (Dec. 5, 2022) 
https://biologicaldiversity.org/w/news/press-releases/emergency-endangered-species-act-protections-sought-for-
clear-lake-hitch-2022-12-05/ 
15 Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights at 25, fn 48; Council on Envtl. Quality, Guidance for 
Federal Departments and Agencies on Indigenous Knowledge (Nov. 30, 2022) https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2022/12/OSTP-CEQ-IK-Guidance.pdf 
16 Emergency Endangered Species Act Protections Sought for the Clear Lake Hitch (Dec. 5, 2022) 

5 
 
 
Tules are reed-like aquatic plants that have been a major component of the wetlands that 
surrounded Clear Lake for hundreds of thousands of years.17 Intact tule wetlands provide 
important habitat for juvenile Clear Lake hitch, though 85 percent of wetland nursery habitat has 
been removed post-colonization. The tule plant has long played an important role for indigenous 
communities in Lake County, with the Pomo tribes in the area using tule to make clothes, 
shelters, boats, and baskets. 18 Tules were also used for food and medicine.  
 
The Pomo tradition of using the tule for basketry is a clear example of a differential health risk 
for tribes that must be considered by the EPA when setting WQS. Clear Lake suffers from 
elevated mercury levels due to a nearby superfund site. According to Meyo Marryfo of the 
Eastern Pomo from the Clear Lake Basin: 
 
You put poison into a land you are harming the whole lake ecology. So Pomos are 
a basketry people, which means our plants go in our mouths when we process our 
basketry. So, as we are doing this, we are putting possibly contaminated things 
into our mouths. So, you’re then seeing mouth cancers, you’re seeing things that 
are happening with your teeth.19 
 
While declining abundance of the tule is also an issue, the processing of tule reeds to make 
basketry presents a unique differential health risk that the EPA must consider. It is also a 
situation where Indigenous Knowledge is critical to making sure WQS are sufficiently 
protective. Given the proposed revisions and the Biden administration’s commitment the 
valuable contributions of the Indigenous Knowledge that tribal nations and indigenous peoples 
have gained and passed down for generations, the EPA should ensure these health risks are 
considered in revising WQS.  
 
V. 
The EPA Must Expeditiously Update its 1985 Guidelines. 
 
We remain concerned that the EPA continues to rely and build upon the 1985 Guidelines for 
Deriving Numerical National Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Aquatic Organisms 
and Their Uses (“1985 Guidelines”), an out-of-date methodology that has allowed the agency to 
justify a higher threshold that has been excoriated by the scientific community.20 The EPA has 
indicated in previous rulemakings that it intends to update its 1985 Guidelines, but since these 
guidelines are still used and cited to in the interim to rationalize maximum concentrations, we 
urge the EPA to update these guidelines as expeditiously as possible. 
 
VI. 
Conclusions 
 
As the EPA recognizes, “tribal reserved rights to use and access natural and cultural resources 
are an intrinsic part of tribal life and are of deep cultural, economic, and subsistence importance 
 
17 Lake County, Tules and Clear Lake https://www.lakecountyca.gov/1118/Clear-Lake-Tules 
18 Terry Knight, Tules are the Lake’s Most Important Plant Lake County Record-Bee (Aug. 23, 2017) 
https://www.record-bee.com/2017/08/23/tules-are-lakes-most-important-plant/ 
19 Jules Tavernier and the Elem Pomo (Aug. 4, 2021) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pnUJNcviI0g 
20 Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights at 33 

6 
 
to tribes.”21 The explicit recognition and protection of tribal reserved rights is long overdue, and 
the EPA clearly has a broader authority than previously recognized through the WQS program. 
While the proposed revisions should be leveraged to protect listed salmon, the Clear Lake hitch, 
and the tule plant, the EPA should continue to endeavor to propose bold new rules to protect 
water quality nationwide. 
 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
J.W. Glass 
EPA Policy Specialist 
Center for Biological Diversity 
 
 
 
 
 
21 Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights at 10

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0238 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs, Oregon 
PO Box C 
Warm Springs, OR 97761 
Phone: 541-553-1161  
Fax: 541-553-1924 
March 6, 2023 
VIA E-MAIL AND FEDERAL ERULEMAKING PORTAL 
Michael S. Regan  
Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of the Administrator 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
Re: 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved 
Rights (EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791) 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
I write on behalf of the Tribal Council of The Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs 
Reservation of Oregon (“CTWS” or “Tribe”) to provide comments on the Environmental 
Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) proposed rule to revise Clean Water Act (“CWA”) regulations on 
water quality standards to protect tribal reserved rights (“Proposed Rule”). The Tribe appreciates 
the EPA’s efforts to ensure that the CWA regulations are consistent with established principles 
concerning the supremacy of tribal reserved rights under federal law. CTWS offers these 
comments to assist the EPA in understanding how the Proposed Rule affects the Tribe’s sovereign 
interests and provides some recommendations for improving the Proposed Rule so that it is more 
protective of those interests.  
I. 
CTWS Interest in the Proposed Rule. 
CTWS is a sovereign and federally recognized Indian tribe. The Tribe is organized under 
a Constitution and Bylaws ratified by its members on December 18, 1937, and approved by the 
United States Department of the Interior on February 14, 1938, pursuant to Section 16 of the Act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378). The Tribe 
is also the legal successor-in-interest to the Indian signatories of the of the Treaty With The Tribes 
of Middle Oregon, which was executed on June 25, 1855 and ratified by Congress on March 8, 
1859 (12 Stat. 963) (“1855 Treaty” or “Treaty”).  
Pursuant to the Treaty, the Tribe ceded certain rights to approximately 10 million acres of 
land to the United States and reserved approximately 640,000 acres for the exclusive use and 
occupation of the Tribe and its members as a permanent homeland (“Warm Springs Reservation”). 
The southern boundary of the Tribe’s ceded lands is the 44th parallel, the northern boundary is the 
Columbia River, and the western boundary is the crest of the Cascade Mountain Range. The middle 
of the channel of the Deschutes River forms the eastern boundary of the Warm Springs 
Reservation, and one of the Deschutes River’s major tributaries, the Metolius River, forms a 
significant portion of the southern boundary of the Reservation. 
DocuSign Envelope ID: B09B2838-2FF6-4460-8391-A9D7E3F97C77

VIA E-MAIL AND FEDERAL ERULEMAKING PORTAL 
Michael S. Regan - EPA Administrator 
March 6, 2023 
Page 2 
The 1855 Treaty recognizes the Tribe as a sovereign, possessing inherent rights to provide 
for the general welfare of its people, including the right to manage its natural resources for their 
benefit. The Treaty expressly reserves rights to the Tribe for its members to go outside (or “off”) 
the Warm Springs Reservation to all of the lands and waters that it had used prior to the Treaty to 
hunt, fish, gather roots and berries, and to pasture livestock. Those rights have been defined and 
upheld, by federal courts, since the early 1900’s, meaning that the Tribe has legally enforceable 
Treaty protected rights throughout its ceded lands and those areas beyond its ceded lands that were 
customarily used from time to time by the Tribe’s members and their ancestors.1  
The Tribe’s treaty-reserved rights are the cornerstone of the legal protections for its culture. 
Simply put, we are a salmon people whose treaty-reserved rights to fish are “not much less 
necessary” to our existence than the “atmosphere” we breathe.2 Our treaty-reserved rights fall 
squarely within the Proposed Rule’s definition of “tribal reserved rights.”3 CTWS is a “right 
holder” for purposes of the Proposed Rule and has a significant interest in the EPA’s development 
of these regulations.4  
II. 
CTWS Comments on the Proposal. 
CTWS supports the overall purpose of the Proposed Rule: to expressly acknowledge, 
through 40 C.F.R. Part 131, that CWA water quality standards must protect tribal reserved rights. 
CTWS is also in favor of the Proposed Rule’s definition of tribal reserved rights;5 requirement that 
                                                 
1  
See, e.g., United States v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371, 381-82 (1905) (noting that treaty fishing 
rights at “usual and accustomed” places referred to areas “outside of” a tribe’s reservation 
boundaries); Seufert Bros. v. United States, 249 U.S. 194, 198-99 (1918) (usual and accustomed 
areas are not circumscribed or limited in any way by ceded area boundaries); Herrera v. Wyoming, 
139 S.Ct. 1686, 1691-2 (2019) (concluding that treaty rights to hunt on “unoccupied lands” outside 
of a tribe’s reservation were not abrogated by a state’s admission to the United States). 
2  
Winans, 198 U.S. at 381. 
3  
See Proposed Rule § 131.3(r). CTWS possesses other rights, such as treaty-reserved water 
rights, which are also covered by the Proposed Rule.  
4  
See id. at § 131.3(s). Apart from its status as a right holder, CTWS is a CWA regulator 
pursuant to its “treatment as a state” status whose authorities and obligations may be affected the 
Proposal.  
5  
Proposed Rule § 131.3(r). The EPA should, however, consider including language that 
would limit this definition to 40 C.F.R. Part 131, such as “Tribal reserved rights, for purposes of 
this part, are any rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, 
either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of 
Federal law.”(insertion shown in underline). 
DocuSign Envelope ID: B09B2838-2FF6-4460-8391-A9D7E3F97C77

VIA E-MAIL AND FEDERAL ERULEMAKING PORTAL 
Michael S. Regan - EPA Administrator 
March 6, 2023 
Page 3 
the EPA consider tribal reserved rights in its review of water quality standard submissions;6 and 
its requirement that the EPA disapprove water quality standards and promulgate federal standards 
where state standards fail to protect tribal reserved rights.7 
The comments included in the remainder of this letter provide suggested changes for 
increasing clarity and effectiveness in the Proposed Rule. CTWS’s lack of comment on a particular 
aspect of the Proposed Rule should not be construed as an endorsement of or objection to that 
aspect. These comments also do not constitute government-to-government consultation on the 
Proposed Rule. CTWS reserves the right to provide additional input on the Proposed Rule after 
the deadline for public comment and to request government-to-government consultation with the 
EPA as Tribal Council deems necessary.  
A. 
The EPA should clarify that water quality standard submissions and decisions 
cannot affect the location, existence, or scope of tribal reserved rights. 
Federal statutes do not abrogate tribal treaty rights unless the language of the statute 
“clearly express[es] its intent to do so.”8 Federal courts interpret statutes to adjudicate and resolve 
disputes concerning the scope of tribal treaty and other reserved rights.9 Neither state governments 
nor the EPA, however, have any authority to abrogate, modify, or adjudicate tribal reserved 
rights.10  
The lack of state authority over tribal reserved rights means that a description, or omission 
of a description, of tribal reserved rights in a state water quality standard submission has no legal 
bearing on the existence, location, scope, or nature of those rights. Likewise, because the EPA has 
no authority over tribal reserved rights, EPA decisions regarding state consideration of tribal 
reserved rights in water quality standard submissions do not affect the existence, location, scope, 
or nature of those rights.11 
                                                 
6  
Id. at § 131.5(a)(9). 
7  
Id. at § 131.5(b). 
8  
Minnesota v. Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians, 526 U.S. 172, 202 (1999). This 
reference to the U.S. Supreme Court’s view of Congress’ authority over tribal treaty rights should 
not be interpreted as an endorsement of its legitimacy. 
9  
See, e.g., Herrera, 139 S.Ct. at 1686. 
10  
See, e.g., U.S. v. Washington, 641 F.2d 1368, 1371 (9th Cir. 1981) (“Only Congress can 
abrogate a treaty, and only by making absolutely clear its intention to do so.”). 
11  
The CWA does not “affect[] or impair[] the provisions of any treaty of the United States.” 
33 U.S.C. § 1371(a). 
DocuSign Envelope ID: B09B2838-2FF6-4460-8391-A9D7E3F97C77

VIA E-MAIL AND FEDERAL ERULEMAKING PORTAL 
Michael S. Regan - EPA Administrator 
March 6, 2023 
Page 4 
For the avoidance of doubt, the EPA should revise the Proposed Rule to clarify that water 
quality standard submissions and EPA decisions on such submissions are not evidence of, and do 
not otherwise affect, the existence, location, scope, or nature of tribal reserved rights. CTWS does 
not anticipate the EPA would take a position that, for example, its approval of a water quality 
standard submission that was silent on tribal reserved rights would later preclude a tribe from 
asserting such rights. Nevertheless, to increase certainty and avoid frivolous attacks on tribal 
reserved rights, the EPA should expressly recognize these principles in 40 C.F.R. Part 131. CTWS 
suggests that the EPA include the following or similar language into its final rule: 
Nothing in this part, or any action taken pursuant to this part, affects 
the existence, location, scope, or nature of rights reserved or held by 
tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, 
executive orders, or other sources of Federal law. 
B. 
The EPA should establish a framework for state engagement with tribes 
concerning tribal reserved rights. 
The Proposed Rule provides that state water quality standard submissions must include, 
“[w]here applicable, information which will aid the [EPA] in evaluating whether the submission 
protects tribal reserved rights.”12 This includes “[i]nformation about the scope, nature, and current 
and past use of the tribal reserved rights, as informed by the right holders.”13 In reviewing state 
water quality standard submissions, the EPA “will initiate tribal consultation with the right holders, 
consistent with applicable EPA tribal consultation policies.”14 
The preamble for the Proposed Rule notes that: 
[t]hese proposed provisions would provide a role for the right 
holders in informing both the initial inquiry of whether tribal 
reserved rights apply and, where reserved rights are  applicable, 
how 
those 
reserved 
rights 
could 
be 
protected 
through 
implementation of the requirements of the proposed rulemaking. 
Specifically, determinations regarding protection of tribal reserved 
rights should be made through a process of mutual consideration and 
discussion between right holders, states, and the Federal 
government.  
Except for providing that tribal reserved right information in state water quality submissions will 
be “informed by the right holders” and affirming the EPA’s tribal consultation obligations, the 
                                                 
12  
Proposed Rule § 131.6(g). 
13  
Id. at § 131.6(g)(1). 
14  
Id. at § 131.9(b). 
DocuSign Envelope ID: B09B2838-2FF6-4460-8391-A9D7E3F97C77

VIA E-MAIL AND FEDERAL ERULEMAKING PORTAL 
Michael S. Regan - EPA Administrator 
March 6, 2023 
Page 5 
Proposed Rule is silent as to the “role” of tribes and the “process of mutual consideration and 
discussion” between tribes, states, and the EPA. This omission creates a risk that tribes will be left 
out of important conversations regarding the identification of their reserved rights and the 
development of water quality standard provisions to protect those rights. 
CTWS acknowledges the difficulty in establishing a universal approach for 
intergovernmental engagement on these matters. The inclusion of some type of engagement 
framework in 40 C.F.R. Part 131 would, however, facilitate tribal involvement and, consistent with 
the EPA’s stated intention for the Proposed Rule, increase clarity, predictability, and transparency 
with respect to the review process. 
CTWS is not in a position to recommend a comprehensive engagement framework. EPA 
should consider, at minimum, the following elements: 
 a requirement that states engage with all affected tribes early and often, rather than 
providing post hoc notifications of final decisions; 
 a requirement that states engage with tribes outside of standard public notice and 
comment processes; 
 protections for the communication of confidential or sensitive tribal information 
concerning reserved rights; 
 a requirement that engagement begin with policy level consultation, followed by 
technical discussions; and 
 a presumption of deference to tribal positions regarding the scope, nature, and current 
and past use of reserved rights. 
III. 
Conclusion. 
CTWS appreciates the opportunity to provide feedback on the Proposed Rule. The EPA 
has a fiduciary responsibility to protect tribal rights and resources, including but not limited to 
tribal reserved rights. The spirit of that responsibility is clearly driving the Proposed Rule, and 
CTWS commends the EPA for taking action in furtherance of its obligations to tribes. 
 
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: B09B2838-2FF6-4460-8391-A9D7E3F97C77

VIA E-MAIL AND FEDERAL ERULEMAKING PORTAL 
Michael S. Regan - EPA Administrator 
March 6, 2023 
Page 6 
If you have any questions or comments regarding this letter, please contact Austin Smith 
Jr., the General Manager of the Tribe’s Branch of Natural Resources. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
Jonathan W. Smith, Sr. 
Chairman 
for Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs 
Reservation of Oregon 
 
cc: 
Tribal Council 
Robert A. Brunoe 
Austin Smith Jr. 
Cathy Ehli 
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: B09B2838-2FF6-4460-8391-A9D7E3F97C77

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0180 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 2nd, 2023 
 
Jennifer Brundage and Erica Fleisig 
Office of Water 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
 
4305T, 1200 Pennsylvania avenue NW 
Washington, DC, 20460  
 
RE: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
Sent via electronic submission via: Regulations.gov 
Dear Jennifer Brundage and Erica Fleisig, 
 
California Coastkeeper Alliance (CCKA) represents a network of California Waterkeeper organizations 
dedicated to fishable, swimmable, and drinkable waters for all Californians. We appreciate the 
opportunity to comment on the proposed amendments to the federal water quality standard regulations to 
protect tribal reserved rights. As an organization that works closely with California to develop and 
implement water quality standards, we are writing to express our support for the EPA’s amendments with 
two additional changes we believe will make these regulations stronger: (1) explicitly recognize that 
water quantity is often an indivisible and essential element of any tribal reserved right, and (2) expand the 
definition of tribal reserved right to include rights recognized by state law or policy when a state has taken 
primary program authority.  
 
I. 
The EPA Should Expressly Recognize that Water Quantity is an Essential Element of 
Tribal Reserved Rights.  
 
First, EPA’s proposed regulations must expressly recognize that water quantity is often an essential 
element of any tribal reserved rights. As the EPA noted in its rulemaking process, courts have determined 
that “tribal reserved rights encompass subsidiary rights that are not explicitly addressed in treaty or 
statutory language but are necessary to render those rights meaningful.”1 Importantly, without adequate 
levels of instream flows, any tribal reserved right based on water quality cease to exist. As an example, 
without adequate flows to support a healthy coho salmon population, California tribes such as the Karuk 
or Yurok are unable to exercise their reserved right to fish these culturally important salmonids.2 In 
addition, when flows become too low, conditions ripen for toxic, harmful algal blooms, severely limiting 
cultural uses of water.3  
 
Because the purpose of this rulemaking is “to establish a transparent and consistent process by which 
states and EPA can set WQS that protect applicable reserved rights,”4 it is imperative that EPA put states 
on notice and make clear that tribal reserved rights require adequate instream flows. Moreover, although 
EPA already attempts to account for suppression effects to “address situations where existing water 
 
1 Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions To Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed Reg. 74361, 74364 (Dec. 5, 2022), 
https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2022-26240/p-85. [hereinafter WQS Revisions]. 
2 See, e.g., Matt Mais, Catastrophic Juvenile Fish Kill Unfolds in Real Time on the Klamath River, The Yurok Tribe, (May 13, 
2021), https://www.yuroktribe.org/post/catastrophic-juvenile-fish-kill-unfolds-in-real-time-on-the-klamath-river; Kaurk Tribe, 
Karuk Traditional Ecological Knowledge and the Management of Spring Chinook Salmon, (Feb, 2023), 
https://www.karuk.us/images/docs/dnr/20230202KarukTraditionalEcologicalKnowledgeAndTheManagementOfSpringChinookS
almonFINAL.pdf.  
3 For a discussion of effects of low flows on tribal uses, including harms to ceremonial uses, see generally, Petition for 
Rulemaking to Review and Revise Bay-Delta Water Quality Standards, (May 24, 2022), https://www.restorethedelta.org/wp-
content/uploads/2022-05-24-Petition-for-Rulemaking-FINAL.pdf. 
4 WQS Revisions, supra note 1, at 74365. 

2 
 
quality is lower than necessary to allow for right holders to fully exercise their tribal reserved rights,”5 the 
proposed language in 40 CFR 131.9 fails to address situations where artificially low flow levels have 
prevented right holders from fully exercising their rights. Therefore, EPA must clarify that tribal reserved 
rights are those rights that existed unsuppressed by low flows caused by artificial diversions or dams, 
much the same way that the proposed regulation clarifies that reserved rights are rights unsuppressed by 
water quality. Accordingly, we recommend the EPA amend the proposed language in 40 CFR 131.9 to 
explicitly recognize that tribal reserved rights rely on adequate water quantity. 
 
II. 
The EPA Must Expand Tribal Reserved Rights to Include Rights Recognized by State 
Law or Policy. 
 
We firmly believe that EPA should aim to minimize and erase any hurdles to clean water that tribes face 
because of historically discriminatory policies. However, these proposed regulations do not extend to 
compacts with states or unratified treaty rights, and only extend to “any rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-
dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, 
executive orders, or other sources of Federal law.”6 California’s history clearly demonstrates why this 
limited definition is problematic.  
 
California is home to over 160 American Indian tribes, with one of the highest American Indian 
populations of any state.7 However, between 1851 and 1852, the United States authorized 18 treaties 
between California tribes and the United States.8  In these treaties, California tribes agreed to cede all 
claims to their historical lands, only reserving some portion “for the sole use and occupancy of the 
aforesaid nation of Indians.”9 These treaties provided for 18 reservations totaling about 11,7000 square 
miles, or 1/7th of the state.10 Despite this, the Senate never ratified the treaties, kept them secret, and “no 
one told the Indigenous people about the rejection and non-approval of the treaties until 1905, fifty-three 
 
5 Id., at 74368.  
6 Id., at 74363.  
7 California State Water Resources Control Board, Tribal Beneficial Uses Guidance Document 2022, (last visited Feb. 22, 2023), 
https://www.waterboards.ca.gov/tribal_affairs/docs/2022/tbu-basin-amendment-09202022.pdf 
8 California State University, Monterey Bay, 1851-1852-EIGHTEEN UNRATIFIED TREATIES BETWEEN CALIFORNIA INDIANS AND THE 
UNITED STATES, US Government Treaties and Reports (June 8, 2016), 
https://digitalcommons.csumb.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1004&context=hornbeck_usa_2_b 
9 Id. at 3. 
10Smithsonian, TREATIES BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND AMERICAN INDIAN NATIONS: UNRATIFIED CALIFORNIA TREATY K, 
1852, (last visited Feb. 22, 2023), https://americanindian.si.edu/nationtonation/unratified-california-treaty-k.html 
Proposed 40 CFR 131.9 should be amended to read: 
(a) Water quality standards must protect tribal reserved rights applicable to waters subject to such 
standards. To protect tribal reserved rights, water quality standards must, to the extent supported by 
available data and information, be established to protect: 
(1) The exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality, low flows caused by 
artificial dams or diversions, or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource; and 
 
(2) The health of the right holders to at least the same risk level as provided to the general 
population of the State.” 
 

3 
 
years, or two generations later.”11 Under the proposed EPA regulation, any reserved water rights the 
United States falsely led tribes to believe they possessed would not be protected.  
 
These historical actions have directly resulted in a discriminatory impact on California tribes, and EPA’s 
proposed regulations further those impacts. Therefore, in states which have taken primary program 
authority, we recommend the EPA amend the proposed language in 40 CFR 131.3 to additionally include 
reserved rights and right holders which are recognized by sources of state law and policy, in addition to 
those recognized by federal law.  
 
*** 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on these proposed regulations. We hope our comments are 
well received and will be implemented to ensure that clean water can be attained to protect important 
tribal beneficial uses. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Cody Phillips 
Policy Analyst 
California Coastkeeper Alliance 
 
 
11 Sean Christian Milanovich, The Treaty of Temecula:  A Story of Invasion, Deceit, Stolen Land, and the Persistence of Power, 
1846-1905, University of California Riverside, at 484, (Sept, 
2021),https://escholarship.org/content/qt6dw0w21v/qt6dw0w21v_noSplash_c218289d06eae02db4979e84b186e853.pdf. 
Proposed 40 CFR 131.3 should be amended to read: 
(r) Tribal reserved rights are any rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held 
by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of 
Federal law, or in states which have taken primary program authority, other sources of state law or 
policy.” 
(s) Right holders are tribes holding rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources pursuant to an 
applicable treaty, statute, executive order, or other sources of Federal law, or in states which have 
taken primary program authority, other sources of state law or policy.”

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0252 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Department of Environmental 
Conservation 
 
Division of Water 
Office of the Director 
 
PO Box 111800 
Juneau, AK 99801-1800 
Main: (907) 465-5180 
www.dec.alaska.gov
March 6, 2023 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Submitted online via https://www.regulations.gov 
 
Re: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
 
To Whom It May Concern: 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”)’s draft 
rulemaking at 40 CFR 131 (“Proposed Rule”) revising the federal water quality standards (“WQS”) regulations to 
protect “tribal reserved rights.”  The Proposed Rule purports to clarify what these rights are and how states 
must recognize and account for them in revising state WQS provisions related to designated uses, criteria, or 
antidegradation. 
The Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation (“ADEC”) Division of Water (“Division”) has 
significant concerns with this Proposed Rule.  First, it does not and cannot apply to 226 of the 227 federally 
recognized tribes1 in Alaska.  Second, EPA lacks authority to promulgate it.  Third, implementing it would 
overwhelm my Division’s administrative and financial capacity and hamstring our current human health criteria 
(“HHC”) efforts.  Accordingly, the Division respectfully requests it be withdrawn. 
 
1 Dep’t of the Interior, BIA, Indian Entities Recognized by and Eligible to Receive Services from the United States 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, 88 FR 2112 (Jan. 12, 2023), available at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2023-
01-12/pdf/2023-00504.pdf (“There is a total of 347 federally recognized Indian Tribes within the 
contiguous 48 states and 227 federally recognized Native entities within the state of Alaska that comprise the 574 
federally recognized Indian Tribes of the United States.”). 

 
 
Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
2 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
Background 
Tribal reserved rights, as a general matter, are rights held by tribes that were not transferred from tribes 
to the federal government under a treaty2 or similar document.3  As the United States Supreme Court has 
explained, “Indians enjoy exclusive treaty rights to hunt and fish on lands reserved to them, unless such rights 
were clearly relinquished by treaty or have been modified by Congress.”4  In addition to hunting and fishing 
rights, this concept has been applied to recognize the existence of implied reserved water quantity rights in 
Indian reservations.5  These rights are determined from the perspective of tribes at the time a treaty was 
executed (or similar law enacted), using historical and other evidence bearing on the nature and scope of the 
right at issue.6  Until now, no legal authority has applied this concept to the water quality context.7  
With this Proposed Rule, EPA would require states to comprehensively8 ascertain the nature and scope 
of tribal reserved rights affecting waters within the State.9  EPA would then require states to use these rights as 
a basis for establishing state WQS under the Clean Water Act (“CWA”) § 303(c).10  WQS would have to be based 
on an “unsuppressed” use of the aquatic resource subject to this right, and states would have to protect the 
health of right holders “to at least the same risk level as provided to the general population of the state”—i.e., 
to the 90th percentile.  States would also be required to submit to EPA information on the “scope, nature, and 
current and past use of reserved rights, as informed by the right holders.”  States must incorporate this 
evaluation and information into their triennial review of state WQS.11  States that do not ascertain and use these 
rights in the way EPA requires would be met with EPA disapproval of state WQS (triggering EPA promulgation of 
state WQS) and violation of the new regulation.   
 
2 In 1905, the Supreme Court held that the Yakima Nation Treaty executed in 1859 “was not a grant of rights to the Indians, 
but a grant of right from them—a reservation of those [rights] not granted.”  See United States v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371, 381 
(1905) (“Only a limitation of [aboriginal rights], however, was necessary and intended [by the treaty with the Yakima], not a 
taking away. In other words, the treaty was not a grant of rights to the Indians, but a grant of right from them—a 
reservation of those [rights] not granted.”). 
3 United States v. Dion, 476 U.S. 734, 745 n.8 (1986) (“Indian reservations created by statute, agreement, or executive order 
normally carry with them the same implicit hunting rights as those created by treaty.”). 
4 Id. at 738. 
5 Winters v. United States, 207 U.S. 564 (1908). 
6 See Washington v. Wash. State Commercial Passenger Fishing Vessel Ass’n, 443 U.S. 658 (1979), modified, 444 U.S. 816 
(1979); Menominee Tribe of Indians v. United States, 391 U.S. 404 (1968); Kimball v. Callahan, 493 F.2d 564, 566 (9th Cir. 
1974); Mille Lacs, 526 U.S. at 196 (“[W]e interpret Indian treaties to give effect to the terms as the Indians themselves 
would have understood them.”). 
7 Indeed, the only relevant authority that EPA cites to support the existence of tribal reserved rights vis a vis water quality is 
a letter written by the Department of Interior in 2015.  See 87 FR 74364 (citing Ltr. from Hilary C. Tompkins, Solicitor, DOI, 
to Avi Garbow, General Counsel, EPA, regarding Maine’s WQS and Tribal Fishing Rights of Maine Tribes (January 30, 2015)).  
8 87 FR 74367 (requiring States in their triennial review to submit an evaluation of “whether there are tribal reserved rights 
applicable to waters subject to the state’s WQS); see EPA & USACE, Revised Definition of Waters of the United States, 88 FR 
3004–3144 (Jan 18, 2023) (establishing significant nexus test which risks subjecting much of Alaska’s waters to federal CWA 
jurisdiction, and, thus, CWA WQS requirements).  
9 87 FR 74364, 74378. 
10 87 FR 74378. 
11 87 FR 74366.  The triennial review process is simply a planning exercise with a public notice component that States are 
required to complete every three years.  EPA does not have approval authority over this process. 

 
 
Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
3 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
EPA defines “tribal reserved rights” as “any rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources 
reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other 
sources of Federal law.”12  Aquatic-dependent resources include “aquatic-dependent wildlife.”13  Aquatic-
dependent wildlife is not further defined.14  EPA justifies the Proposed Rule on the basis that tribal reserved 
rights “could be impaired by water quality levels that limit right holders’ ability to utilize their rights.”15 
Warning that a State’s determination of tribal reserved rights “can be a complex endeavor that involves 
weighing multiple lines of evidence,”16  EPA states that the “critical information” that states must obtain consists 
of: (1) “the nature of the right”; (2) “where the right applies”; and (3) “how the right is exercised by the right 
holders.”17  To guide states in determining what, precisely, these rights are, EPA explains that these rights: 
- 
Might not be limited to Indian Country;18  
- 
Might require the collection of more information than listed above;19 
- 
Might include additional, subsidiary, rights—like the right to cross private lands;20   
- 
Might exist in any federal law;21 and 
- 
Might not be expressly articulated anywhere.22 
Of further help, EPA takes a stab at explaining how courts ascertain these rights, and hints that state agencies, 
like courts, should use Indian canons of construction for guidance.23  Most helpfully, EPA clarifies that these 
rights do not include rights that no longer exist,24 and explains that these rights cannot be found in non-Federal 
law.25   
To implement the Proposed Rule, EPA mandates that states: 
- 
Determine the nature and scope of all tribal reserved rights;26 
- 
Consult with tribes in some way;27 and 
 
12 87 FR at 74363.  EPA cites Winters, 207 U.S. at 576, Cappaert v United States, 426 U.S. 128, 139 (1976), Arizona v United 
States, 373 U.S. 546, 597–602 (1963) and United States v Winans, 198 U.S. 371, 381 (1905) in support.  87 FR at 74363 n.5, 
6, 7.  These cases do not apply to water quality. 
13 87 FR 74370.  
14 ADEC requests that EPA define this term.  What wildlife is not aquatic-dependent—i.e., does not depend on water for its 
existence? 
15 87 FR 74364. 
16 87 FR 74368. 
17 87 FR 74367. 
18 87 FR 74364. 
19 87 FR 74367. 
20 87 FR 74364. 
21 87 FR 74364. 
22 87 FR 74364 (rights can be implied). 
23 87 FR 74364. 
24 87 FR 74366. 
25 87 FR 74366. 
26 87 FR 74378 (“The State . . . shall . . . “evaluat[e] whether there are tribal reserved rights applicable to State waters . . . .”). 
27 87 FR 74378 (requiring the State to include as a “minimum requirement” for the state’s WQS submission “[i]nformation 
about the scope, nature, and current and past use of the tribal reserved rights, as informed by the right holders”); id. 
(defining “right holders” as “tribes holding rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources pursuant to an applicable 

 
 
Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
4 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
- 
Obtain and use information from tribes to promulgate state WQS.28 
Without a trace of irony, EPA claims the Proposed Rule “does not have federalism implications.”29 
Concerns 
Unlike EPA, my Division believes the Proposed Rule has serious federalism implications: it is only the 
latest in a string of EPA actions tracking out an alarming path.  Under the banner of tribal interests, and in the 
name of “science,” EPA has been relentlessly expanding its own power at the expense of states.  This one is no 
different, and will fare no better in court.30  
1. 
This Proposed Rule does not and cannot apply to 226 of Alaska’s federally recognized tribes. 
 
a. 
ANCSA abolished aboriginal hunting and fishing rights for all Alaska tribes but one. 
As explained above, tribal reserved rights are rights that were reserved by tribes following the execution 
of a treaty or enaction of other applicable federal law.  In 1971, Congress passed one such law: the Alaska Native 
Claims Settlement Act (“ANCSA”).  “ANCSA is a unique enactment, both in its complex relationship to the people 
and lands of Alaska, and its importance to the State.”31  As the United States Supreme Court explained, “[i]n 
enacting ANCSA, Congress sought to end the sort of federal supervision over Indian affairs that had previously 
marked federal Indian policy.”32  To this end, ANCSA abolishes all reservations in Alaska except the Annette 
Island Reserve, home of the Metlakatla Indian Community.33  Key here, ANCSA expressly “extinguished” “any 
aboriginal hunting or fishing rights that may exist”34 for every other Alaska tribe.35 
This means that the Proposed Rule cannot apply to require Alaska to recognize any reserved hunting or 
fishing right in 226 of Alaska’s 227 tribes.  For accuracy and clarity, and to avoid misleading members of the 
public, EPA should have expressly addressed this in the Proposed Rule, rather than forcing ADEC to do so in 
these comments.   
 
treaty, statute, executive order, or other source of Federal law.”).  To obtain this information, in other words, States must 
consult with tribes, and must request certain information from tribes, irrespective of the State’s tribal consultation policy.   
28 See supra n.27; 87 FR 74367. 
29 87 FR 74375. 
30 See W. Virginia v. EPA, 142 S. Ct. 2587, 2596 (2022) (Clean Power Plan exceeds EPA’s authority). 
31 Paul v. Andrus, 639 F.2d 507, 509 (9th Cir. 1980). 
32 Alaska v. Native Vill. of Venetie Tribal Gov't, 522 U.S. 520, 523 (1998). 
33 43 U.S.C. § 1618.  In return, Congress authorized the transfer of $962.5 million in state and federal funds and 
approximately 44 million acres of Alaska land to state-chartered private business corporations that were to be formed 
pursuant to ANCSA.  Venetie, 522 U.S. at 524.   
34 43 U.S.C. § 1603(b). 
35 As the Alaska Supreme Court explained, the Metlakatlans were “an exception to the exception,” in that Congress had set 
up a reservation for them. ‘The Metlakatlans’ reservation status sets them apart from other Alaska Natives, making them 
much more like the tribes of the other states.’ Further, we noted that the Metlakatlans have ‘a strong central tribal 
organization unlike most Alaska Native groups.’ We noted that in general, ‘[t]he Native villages and communities of Alaska 
were not organized on ‘tribal’ lines, and the village rather than the ethnological tribe has been the central unit of 
organization.’”  Native Vill. of Stevens v. Alaska Mgmt. & Plan., 757 P.2d 32, 35 (Alaska 1988) (citations omitted).  

 
 
Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
5 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
If EPA envisions additional rights (besides hunting and fishing) to be encompassed by the Proposed Rule, 
EPA must have expressly stated so in its Proposed Rule,36 to provide states and members of the public with a 
meaningful opportunity to comment.  
b. 
EPA misapprehends the nature of its relationship with Alaska tribes. 
With the Proposed Rule, EPA (again37) capes itself as savior of the Nation’s tribes.  EPA cites the “trust 
responsibility that the Federal government has with federally recognized tribal governments”38 and explains that 
the “primary benefits” of the Proposed Rule include “improved ability to maintain traditions and cultural 
landscapes.”39  The Proposed Rule “relies on a combination” of two approaches taken by EPA: “(1) supporting 
the tribes’ sovereignty and exercise of their own environmental authorities[;] and (2) taking direct action on 
behalf of the tribes as part of the Federal Government’s tribal trust responsibility.”40  
EPA fundamentally misunderstands (and appears to have never evaluated) the nature of the 
relationship between Alaska tribes41 and the federal government following the enactment of ANCSA.  In Alyeska 
Pipeline Serv. Co. v. Kluti Kaah Native Vill. of Copper Ctr.,42 the court, evaluating ANCSA, stated that the Act 
“strongly suggests a shift from government superintendence to self regulation.”43  “[T]ribal independence, not 
dependence” was the point.44  “[P]erhaps most notable,” the Alyeska court explained, was ANCSA’s rejection of 
a “wardship or trusteeship” relationship:  
Congress expressly declared its intention not to have an ongoing “wardship or 
trusteeship” relationship with Alaska Native tribes. . . . By the foregoing 
declaration of policy, Congress has clearly said, no more!  Congress now means 
for Alaska Natives to have “maximum participation . . . in decisions affecting their 
rights and property ... without . . . [a] wardship or trusteeship.”45 
 
36 This Proposed Rule does not and cannot apply to Title VIII of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act 
(“ANILCA”), 16 U.S.C. §§ 3111–3126, because ANILCA’s rural subsistence preference provision (a) is not a right that was 
reserved by tribes; (b) is a rural, not tribal, preference; and (c) would raise serious equal protection concerns for ADEC if 
ADEC were required to apply the Proposed Rule to this preference, see McDowell v. Alaska, 785 P.2d 1 (Alaska 1989). 
37 See USEPA, Final Determination To Prohibit the Specification of and Restrict the Use for Specification of Certain Waters 
Within Defined Areas as Disposal Sites; Pebble Deposit Area, Southwest Alaska, 88 FR 7441–7443 (Feb. 3. 2023) (exercising 
CWA § 404(c) veto in the name of saving Alaska’s anadromous fish and Alaska Natives’ traditional way of life and, in the 
process, treating Alaska Natives as a monolith and ignoring State protections of fish and fish habitat). 
38 87 FR 74377. 
39 87 FR 74374. 
40 87 FR 74377. 
41 Excluding Metlakalta, as discussed supra n.35. 
42 1995 WL 18256024, at *14 (D. Alaska 1995). 
43 Id.   
44 Id.  This declaration of policy provides that “the settlement should be accomplished rapidly, with certainty, in conformity 
with the real economic and social needs of Natives, without litigation, with maximum participation by Natives in decisions 
affecting their rights and property, without establishing any permanent racially defined institutions, rights, privileges, or 
obligations, without creating a reservation system or lengthy wardship or trusteeship, and without adding to the 
categories of property and institutions enjoying special tax privileges or to the legislation establishing special relationships 
between the United States government and the State of Alaska . . . .”  43 U.S.C. § 1601(b). 
45  Alyeska, 1995 WL 18256024, at *14 (citing 43 U.S.C. § 1601(b)) 

 
 
Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
6 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
House consideration of the ANCSA bill, too, reflects this understanding: 
The [ANCSA] bill does not establish any trust relationship between the Federal 
Government and the Natives. The regional corporations and the village 
corporations will be organized under State law, and will not be subject to Federal 
supervision except to the limited extent specifically provided in the bill. All 
conveyances will be in fee—not in trust.”46 
The United States Supreme Court affirmed this understanding, explaining that “[i]n enacting ANCSA, 
Congress sought to end the sort of federal supervision over Indian affairs that had previously marked federal 
Indian Policy” before holding that the Venetie tribe was not a “dependent Indian community” for purposes of 
determining whether their land qualified as Indian country under 18 U.S.C. § 1151.47  In so holding, the Court 
rejected the argument that federally recognized tribes’ status as “domestic dependent nations” means that 
tribes are “ipso facto under the superintendence of the Federal Government.”48  Reiterating that “ANCSA’s 
settlement provisions were intended to avoid a ‘lengthy wardship or trusteeship[,]’”49 the Court ended its 
opinion by emphasizing ANCSA’s purposes of “Native self-determination” and the desire to “end paternalism in 
federal Indian relations.”50 
EPA, in other words, may not treat itself as trustee, or Alaska’s tribes as wards, for 226 of Alaska tribes.  
Because of ANCSA, that legal relationship simply does not exist.  The Proposed Rule cannot alter this. 
2. 
EPA lacks authority to promulgate the Proposed Rule.  
EPA bases this rule on its general authority to prescribe regulations as necessary to implement the 
CWA51 in conjunction with two provisions of the CWA: (1) § 303(c), which requires states to promulgate WQS for 
approval by EPA; and (2) § 511(a)(3), which provides that the CWA “shall not be construed as . . . affecting or 
impairing the provisions of any treaty of the United States.”52  EPA elaborates that “more broadly,” § 303(c)’s 
“structure and objectives for the establishment and oversight of WQS, including the discretion afforded to EPA, 
provide ample room for the agency to consider and give effect to all applicable reserved rights.”53 
a. 
The Proposed Rule exceeds EPA’s statutory authority under the CWA. 
Neither § 303(c) nor § 511(a)(3) justify the Proposed Rule.  Section 303(c) provides EPA with the power 
to approve or disapprove WQS, and the power to promulgate WQS for states in the event of disapproval.  It 
does not confer upon EPA the power to require states to undertake a wild goose chase in trying to locate 
unarticulated rights in federal law, consult with tribes, or obtain certain information from tribes.   
 
46 H.R.Rep. 523, 92d Cong., 1st Sess. 9, reprinted in 1971 U.S.C.C.A.N. 2192, 2199 (emphasis added).   
47 Venetie, 522 U.S. at 523, 525, 534.  
48 Id. at 531 n.5. 
49 Id. at 533. 
50 Id. 
51 See CWA § 501. 
52 87 FR 74365.   
53 87 FR 74365.   

 
 
Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
7 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
Perhaps recognizing 303(c)’s insufficiency, EPA invokes § 511(a)(3).  But § 511(a)(3) is not a grant of 
power, it is a limitation on the CWA as a whole.  Even if § 511(a)(3) could be understood as a grant of power: it is 
limited to rights recognized in treaty provisions.  It does not include statutes, executive orders, all federal law, 
and other non-treaties; and it does not include rights that are implied or unarticulated or otherwise not spelled 
out in a provision.  EPA’s infidelity to the text of § 511(a)(3) is not cured by EPA’s vague nod to the discretion 
afforded by § 303(c).   
EPA has not demonstrated statutory authority for promulgating this rule.  Even if the Proposed Rule 
were grounded in the CWA, to the extent it applies to rights recognized in non-treaties and not contained in any 
provision, it exceeds any power conferred by § 511(a)(3).   
b. 
The Proposed Rule violates the United States Constitution. 
“Administrative agencies are creatures of statute” and “accordingly possess only the authority” that 
Congress has lawfully provided.54  Agencies must hew closely to the law as written and meticulously justify their 
actions.  They are never at liberty to expand their own power.55  
EPA roots its authority to act in the CWA, which was enacted pursuant to the Interstate Commerce 
Clause power.56  Far beyond simply disregarding cooperative federalism, the Proposed Rule, if finalized, would 
exceed the interstate Commerce Clause power, violate the anti-commandeering doctrine, exceed the Spending 
Clause power, and violate the major questions doctrine.   
i. 
Commerce Clause 
The Constitution gives Congress the power to regulate “the channels of interstate commerce,” “persons 
or things in interstate commerce,” and “those activities that substantially affect interstate commerce.”57  
Because the CWA was enacted pursuant to the Interstate Commerce Clause power, any regulations 
promulgated under this Act may not exceed the bounds of that power.     
EPA’s Proposed Rule mandates that: (1) state agencies determine the existence, nature, and scope of 
certain federal legal rights; and (2) states consult with, and solicit information from, tribes.  This is not a 
regulation of the channels or instrumentalities of interstate commerce, nor of an activity that “substantially 
affects” interstate commerce.  It is a regulation of State–Tribe relations and a mandate that States take a certain 
approach to interacting with tribes.  Such a regulation is entirely unconnected to interstate commerce.   
 
This regulation is not a valid exercise of the Interstate Commerce Clause power, so cannot be a valid 
exercise of the power conferred upon EPA by the CWA. 
 
54 NFIB. v. Dep’t of Lab., Occ’l Safety & Health Admin., 142 S. Ct. 661, 665 (2022).   
55 See NRDC v. EPA, 822 F.2d 104, 131 (D.C. Cir. 1987) (“[EPA]’s rulemaking power is limited to adopting regulations to carry 
into effect the will of Congress as expressed in the statute.”). 
56 See Solid Waste Agency of N. Cook Cty. v. U.S. Army Corps of Eng'rs, 531 U.S. 159 (2001). 
57 NFIB, 567 U.S. at 536 (2012); United States v. Morrison, 529 U.S. 598, 609 (2000). 

 
 
Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
8 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
ii. 
Anti-commandeering doctrine 
By requiring states to recognize new rights and by regulating State–Tribe relations, EPA regulates states 
in their capacity as sovereigns.  This violates the anti-commandeering doctrine of the United States Constitution.  
The anti-commandeering doctrine safeguards the “fundamental structural decision incorporated into 
the Constitution” that the federal government may not issue affirmative (“do this”) or negative (“avoid that”) 
commands “directly to the States.”58  Commandeering threatens the “healthy balance of power between the 
States and the Federal Government” and distorts political accountability by blurring responsibility between 
states and the federal government and leaving state voters uncertain whom to “credit or blame” for a state 
action.59   
 
Unlike other regulations promulgated under the CWA, which are permissibly aimed at the technical 
regulation of water pollution, the Proposed Rule is impermissibly aimed at regulating states as sovereigns.  It 
requires States to determine the existence and scope of federal rights and requires states to manage State–
Tribe relations on EPA’s terms.  While my Division shares EPA’s goal of protecting water quality for Alaska tribes, 
EPA “may not conscript state governments as its agents” to achieve this goal.60  State voters observing my 
Division struggling to ascertain federal rights, and engaging with tribes to solicit and collect certain information, 
may have trouble ascertaining whether the Division or EPA is to credit or to blame for these activities.  More 
realistically, these voters may wonder whether they have my Division or EPA to blame for throwing limited 
government resources into the black hole of administranglia created by the Proposed Rule.  
iii. 
Spending Clause 
The Proposed Rule is not tied to any funds: it is simply an unfunded mandate.  ADEC does, however, 
receive federal funding to implement WQS, and EPA may tie the Proposed Rule explicitly to those funds when 
finalized.   
The Spending Clause empowers Congress to “lay and collect Taxes, . . . to pay the Debts and provide for 
the common Defence and general Welfare of the United States.”61  The federal government62 may, within limits, 
use this power to encourage states to “tak[e] certain actions that [it] could not [otherwise] require them to 
take.” 63  A state’s acceptance of the federal funds will generally constitute consent to the conditions imposed by 
Congress.64 
The federal government may “fix the terms on which it shall disburse federal money to the States.”65  To 
validly exercise this power, the federal government must speak “unambiguously” and “with a clear voice” when 
 
58 Murphy, 138 S. Ct. at 1475. 
59 Id. at 1477 (citations omitted). 
60 505 U.S. at 178. 
61 U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 1.   
62 An agency that Congress has tasked with implementing a statute that imposes spending conditions is also subject to the 
Spending Clause’s restrictions. See New York v. United States Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs., 414 F. Supp. 3d 475, 566–72 
(S.D.N.Y. 2019). 
63 Coll. Sav. Bank v. Fla. Prepaid Postsecondary Educ. Expense Bd., 527 U.S. 666, 686 (1999). 
64 Id. 
65 Pennhurst State School and Hospital v. Halderman, 451 U.S. 1, 17 (1981). 

 
 
Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
9 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
articulating conditions.66  These conditions must be articulated clearly enough for “the States to exercise their 
choice knowingly, cognizant of the consequences of their participation.”67  A state cannot knowingly accept a 
condition if the state “is unable to ascertain what is expected of it.”68 
The conditions set forth in the Proposed Rule are unconstitutionally ambiguous.  They require the states 
to ascertain the nature and scope of federal rights that may not presently be recognized in law, without offering 
meaningful guidance on how to ascertain these rights.  The closest EPA comes to speaking clearly is telling states 
to look at federal law and talk to tribes.  Conditions that leave states unable to ascertain what is required, like 
how to ascertain the nature and scope of a right, are unconstitutional.69 
iv. 
Major Questions Doctrine 
If Congress “wishes to assign to an agency decisions of vast economic and political significance[,]” the U.S. 
Supreme Court “expect[s] Congress to speak clearly.”70  This tenet responds to “the danger posed by the growing 
power of the administrative state”71 by ensuring that top-level, political decisions are made by elected officials, 
not appointed agency officers.72  To that end, the major questions doctrine provides that an agency must “point 
to ‘clear congressional authorization’” in the “extraordinary case[]” where the agency claims the power to make 
decisions of vast “economic and political significance.”73  
Recognizing that “[a] decision of such magnitude and consequence rests with Congress itself, or an agency 
acting pursuant to a clear delegation from that representative body[,]”74 the major questions doctrine polices 
politically significant agency action premised on vague statutory grants of power.75   
EPA’s Proposed Rule directs states to work with tribes and to do so on EPA’s terms.  In order to meet EPA’s 
requirement that information states submit is “obtained from tribes,” states must meet with tribes, and must 
solicit them for the information EPA requests.  EPA unabashedly “aims to facilitate greater coordination between 
states and tribal governments”76 and boldly states as its goal “that the sovereignty and management role of both 
state and tribal governments will be better understood and aligned” by implementing the Proposed Rule.77    
 
66 Id. 
67 Id. 
68 Id. 
69 W. Virginia v. U.S. Dep’t of the Treasury, 59 F.4th 1124, 1143 (11th Cir. 2023). 
70 Util. Air Regul. Grp. v. EPA, 573 U.S. 302, 324 (2014) (cleaned up).   
71 City of Arlington v. FCC, 569 U.S. 290, 315 (Roberts, C.J., dissenting).   
72 W. Virginia v. EPA, 142 S. Ct. 2587, 2617–18 (2022) (Gorsuch, J., concurring). 
73 Id. at 2605. 
74 Id. at 2616. 
75 E.g., Gonzales v. Oregon, 546 U.S. 243, 267–68 (2006) (Attorney General lacked authority from “oblique” statutory provision 
to criminalize assisted suicide).  In January of this year, the Supreme Court concluded that a lone statutory subsection of the 
Occupational Safety and Health Act did not clearly authorize OSHA’s COVID-vaccine mandate.   NFIB v. Dep. of Lab., OSHA, 
142 S. Ct. 661 (2022) (per curium).  Just last June, the Supreme Court held that Congress’ grant of power to EPA to regulate 
“systems” did not clearly authorize the Clean Power Plan rule.  West Virginia, 142 S. Ct at 2616. 
76 87 FR 74378. 
77 87 FR 74378. 

 
 
Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
10 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
This is not EPA’s job: EPA’s job is to protect human health and the environment.  How the State should 
manage its relationship with tribes is a quintessential major political question.  It is a delicate political dance 
involving relationship building, negotiation, and finding amicable ways to coexist and resolve differences.  EPA 
here writes itself a ticket to this dance and tries to puppeteer the dance moves.  And it believes it can do this using 
§§ 303(c) and 511, neither of which remotely hint at this power.  EPA’s Proposed Rule, like the Clean Power Plan 
rule recently invalidated by the Supreme Court, is entirely out of bounds.   
3. 
The Proposed Rule is unworkable.   
If EPA (incorrectly) intends to apply the Proposed Rule to Alaska tribes, my Division will be overwhelmed 
with the administrative and financial burden of implementing it.  Ascertaining potentially applicable tribal 
reserved rights at an unsuppressed use, and crafting WQS to protect the health of right holders at the 90th 
percentile could be challenging for states in the Lower 48 having several federally recognized tribes.  For 
Alaska—home to 227 federally recognized tribes—this task is unfathomable.  EPA’s notion that states may do 
this using the existing apparatus of their current WQS revision process—an already complicated and technical 
process—is unconscionable and naïve.  My Division’s specialists and engineers are trained in, and skilled at, 
scientific and technical decision-making; they are not trained to divine unarticulated rights at a hypothetical 
usage rate by collecting historical- and cultural-practices data from tribes.  EPA blissfully ignores the likelihood of 
disagreements between states and tribes, between tribes and tribes, between tribes and Alaska Native 
Corporations (both regional and village), between states and EPA, and between tribes and EPA; or the likelihood 
of conflicting or inconsistent data from different tribes or tribal members; or the likelihood that litigation will 
result.  ADEC may not even have the authority to make these determinations in the first place.  In short, EPA 
appears to be setting state agencies up to fail.78    
 
Additionally, to the extent EPA believes this Proposed Rule is applicable to Alaska, it grossly 
underestimates its costs to ADEC, which would exceed financial capacity.  EPA cannot conduct a realistic 
economic analysis without first clarifying this rule. 
 
Further, to the extent it applies to Alaska, the Proposed Rule would hamstring ADEC’s effort to revise 
Alaska’s human health water quality criteria.  The Proposed Rule affects the Fish Consumption Rate (“FCR”), 
Cancer Risk Level (“CRL”), and other inputs to the HHC formula.  Regarding the FCR, EPA’s 2000 Methodology for 
Deriving Ambient Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human Health79 allows states to choose either the 
90th percentile of the statewide (general) population or the 50th percentile of a high consuming subpopulation.  
The Proposed Rule appears to eliminate the latter as an option, requiring the former.  In other words, states 
might be required to consider an FCR that is protective of the 90th percentile of a tribe holding a reserved right.  
EPA provides no science-based explanation of why this is necessary or of what this might cost to states like 
Alaska that have a great deal of fish and a large number of tribes.  The Proposed Rule also does not address 
whether an HHC for a particular pollutant would be applicable only to waters associated with tribal reserved 
rights, or applicable on a regional or statewide basis; or how this might work for a state taking a regional or 
 
78 Agencies are not required to undertake processes that will place an intolerable burden upon them.  See Air Line Pilots 
Ass’n, Int’l v. Quesada, 276 F.2d 892, 896 (2d Cir. 1960). 
79 USEPA, Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human Health, EPA-822-B-00-004 
(2000). 

 
 
Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
11 
March 6, 2023 
 
 
statewide approach to promulgating HHC.  The logistics of ascertaining what an unsuppressed use is remain 
unanswered by this rule.  The Proposed Rule would jeopardize my Division’s chances of meeting our EPA-
imposed 2-year timeline for finalizing the HHC regulations.   
Conclusion 
 
ADEC Division of Water respectfully requests the Proposed Rule be withdrawn.  Should EPA choose to 
bulldoze ahead with finalization, continuing along the path of exceeding its own power and trampling on state 
power, ADEC Division of Water requests that EPA expressly exclude Alaska tribes from coverage under the final 
rule.  If you have any questions, please contact me at (907) 465-5180 or by e-mail at randy.bates@alaska.gov. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Randy Bates 
Director 
 
CC: 
The Honorable Lisa Murkowski, United States Senate 
 
The Honorable Dan Sullivan, United States Senate 
 
The Honorable Mary Peltola, United States House of Representatives 
 
Jason Brune, Commissioner, Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation 
 
Douglas Vincent-Lang, Commissioner, Alaska Department of Fish and Game 
 
John Boyle, Commissioner, Alaska Department of Natural Resources 
 
Treg Taylor, Attorney General, Alaska Department of Law

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0293 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
KEWEENAW BAY INDIAN COMMUNITY 
2023 TRIBAL COUNCIL 
DOREEN G. BLAK ER, President 
TONI J. MINTON. Vice President 
ELIZABF.TH 'LIZ" JULIO. Secretary 
ROBERT "R.D."  CURTIS, JR., Assistant Secretary 
TIIEODORE "AUSTIN" AY RES. Treasurer 
Keweenaw Bay Tribal Center 
"16429 Beartown Road 
Baraga, Michigan 49908 
Phone (906) 353-6623 
Fax (906) 353-7540 
EDWARD M. EDWARDS 
EVERETT EKDAHL, JR. 
SUE ELLEN ELMBLAD 
R.ANDALL R. HAATA1A 
KIM KLOPSTEIN 
SUSAN J. LAFERNIER 
RODNEY LOONSFOOT 
March 6, 2023 
IVIichael Regan, Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
Re: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
On behalf of the Keweenaw Bay Indian Community (the "Community") a tribal nation with 
more than 3,600 members, we submit these comments regarding the Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-
0791. 
The Community is successor in interest to the L'Anse Band of Chippewa Indians of Lake 
Superior, a signatory of the 1842 Treaty of LaPointe, Oct. 4, 1842, 7 Stat. 591 (the "1842 
Treaty"), which ceded over 10,000,000 acres of land to the United States, including the western 
half of the Upper Peninsula. Article 2 of the 1842 Treaty provided that "Wile Indians stipulate 
for the right of hunting on the ceded territory, with the other usual privileges of occupancy . . . 
In 1854, the United States and the Chippewa Indians of Lake Superior signed the Treaty with the 
Chippewa at La Pointe, Sept. 30, 1854, 10 Stat. 1109 (the 1854 Treaty"). Under Article 11, the 
right to hunt and fish within the ceded territory was reaffirmed. A treaty is a legally binding 
agreement between sovereign nations. See Herrera v. Wyoming, 139 S. Ct. 1686, 1699, 203 
L.ED.2d 846 (2019.) Treaties with Tribes "rnust be interpreted as the Indians would have 
understood them." People v. Lal3lanc, 248 N.W.2d 199, 203-204. The 1842 Treaty and the 1854 
Treaty remain in effect today, and the Community continues to rely on the rights protected in 
both treaties for subsistence, religious, and cultural practices of its members, and to further the 
economic well-being of its rnembers. In the very simplest of terms, treaty rights are essential to 
the Community's way of life. 
LAKE SUPERIOR BAND OF CHIPPEWA INDIANS 
"Home of the Midnight Two-Step Championship" 

The Community relies upon diverse healthy ecosystems and the fish, plants, and wildlife that 
these ecosystems support. Ojibwe people have historically, and continue, to use natural resources 
for spiritual, cultural, medicinal, subsistence, and economic purposes. The ability to exercise 
these treaty rights is completely dependent upon clean water and healthy ecosystems. Treaty 
rights, environmental health, and tribal culture are all interconnected. 
Water is sacred to our tribe. We treat water with respect and dignity as a living entity and work 
hard to protect it. The United States has a general trust responsibility to protect our lands, assets 
and resources. Some of our most important resources are the clean water that flows over and 
through our lands and the natural resources that depend upon it. High quality, clean water that is 
safe from contaminants is of vital importance for the health and well-being of the Community. 
We believe that it is within the best interest of the tribe to be proactive in protecting the land and 
waters of our ceded territory. The Community depends upon these waters for both physical and 
spiritual sustenance. The courts have long recognized the federal trust responsibility, as has 
Congress. 
Although we appreciate the intent of the proposed rule to provide water quality standards to 
protect treaty rights within ceded territories, there needs to be more clarity within the rule. 
•
EPA needs to ensure that states appropriately recognize treaty rights existence and 
scope, not leave this up to the states to decide. EPA cannot delegate the federal 
governments treaty obligations to states without responsibility. When states 
assume authorities under federal programs, the federal obligation to uphold trust 
responsibilities and treaty right protections needs to be respected. 
•
EPA needs to be aware of the Community's wish to protect sensitive information. 
Some ceremonial, religious, spiritual uses, or cultural practices can be sensitive 
information that needs to be guarded against misuse, overuse, or overharvesting. 
Sharing information regarding treaty resources will need to be protected, or 
approached without the need for full details. 
•
EPA needs to include information provided as Traditional Ecological Knowledge 
by the Community, not all data that the Community holds comes from western 
science practices. 
•
EPA needs to provide more information for the process of resolving potential 
conflicts between states and tribes, or potential conflicts between tribes with 
treaty rights in the same ceded territories. 
•
EPA needs to provide more information on the collaboration of multiple states 
and tribes of treaty rights protections when a ceded territory contains more than 
one state. 

In conclusion, the Community appreciates the intent of the proposed rule to provide water 
quality standards for the protection of treaty rights within ceded territories, but we believe that 
there needs to be more clarity in how EPA will uphold treaty obligations throughout this process. 
Please accept our comments regarding Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791. If you have any questions feel 
free to reach out to rne or rny staff: Evelyn Ravindran  eravindran@kbic-nsn.gov,  or Shannon 
DesRochers  sdesrochers@kbic-nsn.gov. 
Y-a-Q.4-deA 
Doreen G. Blaker 
President 
Cc: 
Evelyn Ravindran, Natural Resources Director 
Shannon DesRochers, Great Lakes Resource Specialist 
Diane Price, Environmental Specialist 
Justin Woodruff, Water Resources Specialist 
Kevin Carlisle, Attorney

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0240 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
State Water Resources Control Board 
March 6, 2023 
VIA ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
https://www.regulations.gov 
Re:  Comments to Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights; Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791; 87 Fed. Reg. 74363 
(Dec. 5, 2022) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. Part 131) 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
The California State Water Resources Control Board (State Water Board) appreciates 
the opportunity to provide comments on the United States Environmental Protection 
Agency’s (USEPA) proposed rulemaking which would require states to take specific 
actions to assess express or implied federal reserved rights for tribes in setting water 
quality standards under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 
as amended.1 The rulemaking proposes changes and additions to the federal water 
quality standards regulations, 87 Fed. Reg. 74363 (Dec. 5, 2022)2 (to be codified at 40 
C.F.R. Part 131). The State Water Board exercises adjudicatory and regulatory 
functions in the field of water resources, including administering California’s water rights 
system and protecting the quality of California’s water resources (Cal. Wat. Code, 
 
1 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.; Clean Water Act, § 101 et seq. This letter refers to the section of the Clean 
Water Act as enacted by Congress and not to the corresponding section appearing in title 33. 
2 This letter cites to the proposed water quality standards regulation and preamble as “87 Fed. Reg. [page 
no.], col. [no.].” 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 2 - 
March 6, 2023 
§ 174), including through implementing the Clean Water Act and California’s Porter-
Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Cal. Wat. Code, § 13000 et seq.). 
The State Water Board recognizes and agrees that water quality protections can be vital 
for a tribe’s cultural, spiritual, and sustenance practices, as described in the proposed 
rule, and that explicit consideration of those practices in a water quality planning context 
is warranted.3 Indeed, the State Water Board has worked extensively with California 
tribes and tribal representatives from both federally recognized tribes and tribes who 
currently lack federal recognition to, in 2017, establish two new tribal beneficial use 
definitions and adopt two corresponding water quality criteria,4 all of which were 
approved by USEPA the same year.5 
The State Water Board has significant concerns, however, with the USEPA proposed 
rule’s “tribal reserved rights” framework for addressing tribal uses.6 As detailed further 
below, USEPA’s proposed approach fails to sufficiently account for and protect tribal 
water uses by tribes lacking federal recognition or a federal land base, fails to 
adequately protect tribal uses that were not a primary reason for the reservation, and 
imposes significant additional and unnecessary hurdles to timely adoption and 
implementation of water quality standards, including those that protect tribal uses. 
Focusing water quality review on the protection of tribal uses, rather than reserved 
rights, avoids these problems and presents a far superior option to protect water quality 
needs for tribal-specific purposes. 
 
3 See State Water Board Resolution No. 2021-0050 (recognizing link between water resources and 
California Native American Tribes’ cultural, spiritual and subsistence traditions, the cultural, spiritual, 
subsistence and health problems related to water quality concerns and displacement, and reaffirming the 
Board’s commitment to improve consultation and input on decisions affecting California water resources, 
including drawing on traditional ecological knowledge). 
4 See section 4.F, below, for a fuller discussion of the State Water Board’s development of water quality 
tribal beneficial use definitions and corresponding mercury water quality objectives, and footnote 33 for a 
status of the nine California Regional Water Quality Control Boards’ (Regional Water Boards) planning 
actions involving those standards. 
Under Clean Water Act section 303 and 40 C.F.R. Part 131, water quality standards include designated 
uses of the waters and water quality criteria to protect those uses. California refers to “designated use” as 
“beneficial use” and “water quality criteria” as “water quality objectives.” In California, the water quality 
control plans contain the beneficial uses of waters of the state and water quality objectives to protect 
those uses. The terms “designated uses” and “beneficial uses” are used interchangeably throughout the 
remainder of this letter. The State Water Board and the Regional Water Boards adopt water quality 
control plans through a formal administrative rulemaking process, and once approved by California’s 
Office of Administrative Law, the plans have the force of regulations. 
5 See infra, fn. 30 (identifying the State Water Board’s adopting resolution, the statewide water quality 
control plan containing the water quality standards for tribal uses, and USEPA’s approval letter.) 
6 The proposed rule defines “tribal reserved rights” at proposed 40 C.F.R. section 131.3(r). In this letter, 
“tribal reserved rights” refers to this proposed definition, while “federal reserved rights” refers to rights 
reserved by the federal government through acquisition or retention of lands. 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 3 - 
March 6, 2023 
1. 
Focusing water quality standards on tribal reserved rights fails to address 
the water quality needs of many California Native American tribes. 
Throughout the United States, federal policies including forced relocation, forced 
assimilation, allotment and termination have resulted in inconsistent and severely 
limited federal recognition and federal land bases. This has resulted in many Native 
Americans lacking access to treaty rights, reservation lands, the ability to receive 
treatment-as-a-state status under federal statutes including the Clean Water Act, 
access to federal resources, and formal consultation on federal actions. This lack of 
recognition does not, however, determine whether a tribe maintains cultural, 
subsistence, spiritual or other practices that depend on water quality.  
California has the largest Native American population in the United States and is home 
to approximately 15% of the entire nation’s population identifying in whole or in part as 
Native American or Alaska Native.7 The state is home to about 110 federally recognized 
tribes8 and approximately 100 non-federally recognized tribes9. In the California context, 
the inequity of relying on a tribal reserved rights framework is particularly salient, as 
Mexican, federal, and state actions have severely limited tribes’ access to federal 
reserved rights. Prior to statehood, thousands of Native peoples were displaced into 
Spanish missions along the coast. After the United States acquired California through 
the Treaty of Guadalupe de Hidalgo in 1848, federal negotiations with Native Americans 
across California resulted in 18 proposed treaties establishing reservations on 
approximately one seventh of California. But, the Senate refused to ratify the treaties in 
1852, with the result that there are no treaties with California tribes and there were no 
reservations established near the time of statehood (1850).10 Additionally, because 
tribal claims were not filed through the process established by the California Land Act of 
1851 (9 Stat. 631), most tribes were found to have waived land claims stemming from 
 
7 Race and Ethnicity in the United States: 2010 Census and 2020 Census, at 
https://www.census.gov/library/visualizations/interactive/race-and-ethnicity-in-the-united-state-2010-and-
2020-census.html. 
8 Bureau of Indian Affairs, Pacific Region, map: 
https://www.bia.gov/sites/default/files/dup/assets/bia/pacreg/california%20map%202022_large.pdf?_gl=1*
qshosr*_ga*MTc2MDY5MzgyNC4xNjQ4NTg3MTY3*_ga_99DR80KW2E*MTY1MDQ2NDYxNi40NS4xLjE
2NTA0NjkzODMuNTc  
9 California’s Native American Heritage Commission maintains contact information for non-federally 
recognized tribes.  The number is subject to change based on a number of factors, including tribes’ 
receipt of federal recognition, tribes’ available resources to support consultation, new information, and a 
return of scattered descendants to a place and cultural practices previously disturbed. 
10 See Bureau of Indian Affairs, Pacific Region “Who We Are” https://www.bia.gov/regional-
offices/pacific/who-we-
are#:~:text=Between%201906%20and%201910%20a,the%20Rancheria%20System%20in%20California; 
Miller, Larisa K., The Secret Treaties with California’s Indians, (2013), https://www.arch 
ives.gov/files/publications/prologue/2013/fall-winter/treaties.pdf 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 4 - 
March 6, 2023 
rights that pre-existed the transfer of California from Mexico to the U.S in 1848, at least 
where there was a patent issued free of such claim.11 
Instead of the treaty process or the recognition of lands established under prior Mexican 
rule, a much smaller amount of reservation land was established in California. This 
occurred in a piecemeal manner, through a series of executive orders and 
administrative actions over the ensuing 60 years. Some of these federal tribal lands 
were established relatively early in statehood, and some many decades later. The effect 
of the later-established lands is that any federally reserved rights associated with the 
eventual land acquisition are as of a later baseline and may be junior to other 
appropriative water rights established in the intervening years.12 Some federal tribal 
lands were reserved directly from the federal domain, while others were purchased for 
tribal purposes.13 Some are within a tribe’s traditional homelands and some are without. 
Some were established for resettlement of more than one tribe. Many tribes were wholly 
or largely displaced and have remained without a recognized land base or any formal 
federal recognition at all. After establishment, many of the tribal lands set aside were 
further fractured by allotment and termination. All of these factors are relevant to the 
scope and existence of federally reserved rights in California, yet none are relevant to 
the degree of water quality protection required to allow for the subsistence, cultural 
traditions, and spiritual practices of California Native American tribes. 
As the California example highlights, tying water quality protections of tribal beneficial 
uses to tribal reserved rights is woefully inadequate. In fact, this strained approach 
results in the least protection for those tribal people who already face significant hurdles 
in sustaining cultural, spiritual, traditional subsistence and other practices. 
A Native basket-weaver’s risk from exposure to toxins accumulated on or in riparian 
plants does not depend on the federal status of their tribe, whether any federal 
instrument should be interpreted to establish a right to basketweaving, or the 
reservation status of the land on which the plants were gathered: it depends on the 
water quality in which the plants grow. In focusing on the “health of [tribal reserved] right 
holders” rather than on tribal people practicing basketweaving, the USEPA’s proposed 
rule needlessly omits water quality protections for tribal peoples without such reserved 
rights, or who are practicing outside the bounds reserved by their federal instrument. 
(87 Fed. Reg. 74378, col. 3 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9 (a)(2).) Federal recognition 
and land status are similarly irrelevant to the water quality needed for other tribal water 
uses that California tribes have identified, including: high consumption levels of aquatic 
species; consumption of specific aquatic species not more broadly consumed; ritual 
 
11 Robinson v. Jewell (9th Cir. 2015) 790 F.3d 910 
12 Unless, of course, such rights retain a “time immemorial” priority. (See U.S. v. Adair, 723 F.2d 1394, 
1412-1414 (9th Cir. 1983) [treaty continued pre-existing hunting and fishing rights, so date of priority pre-
dates date of reservation].) 
13 Federal reserved rights apply to lands “reserved” by the federal government from the public domain. 
See e.g. Cappaert v United States, 426 US 128, 138 (1976). There is a dearth of case law describing 
whether such principles can also apply on lands purchased for tribal purposes. 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 5 - 
March 6, 2023 
water use, including for immersion and consumption; centrality of a landscape, 
riverscape or ecosystem in a tribal cosmology; and medicinal wetland and riparian plant 
use. The proposed rule’s focus on the exercise of tribal reserved rights and on right 
holders excludes those who were removed from their ancestral lands (or the areas 
thereof in which a practice is appropriate or available) and settled elsewhere, 
unrecognized tribes, and de-recognized tribes—and thus excludes the majority of 
California tribes. 
2. 
Even for tribes with federal reservation lands, a focus on tribal reserved 
rights is inadequate. 
By establishing a requirement that water quality standards be evaluated based on tribal 
reserved rights, rather than on supporting designated uses, the proposed rule places an 
undue burden and limitation even on federally recognized tribes’ on-reservation 
activities. For no other designated use do USEPA regulations require that users first 
establish a federally established right to put the nation’s waters to a particular use or to 
have criteria established to protect such a use. Rather, the Clean Water Act seeks to 
make all of the nation’s waters fishable and swimmable, and requires protection of all 
existing uses. By imposing the significant burden of establishing a tribal reserved right 
to engage in a practice (see 3 below), USEPA’s proposed rule places a barrier on 
protecting these actions that no other use or users face. 
Furthermore, under United States v. New Mexico, implied federal reserved rights to 
water are available only for the primary purpose of a reservation, water for secondary 
purposes is not available.14 While this case concerned implied federal rights for a 
national forest rather than a tribal reservation, some jurisdictions have applied the 
limitation in the tribal context, and the Supreme Court has not yet addressed the 
question.15 There is no defensible reason not to apply the Clean Water Act’s water 
quality standards protections to all tribal uses, including those that may have been 
considered “secondary” at the time a reservation was established.  
Additionally, because many federally recognized tribes were driven far from their homes 
or granted only small tracts of land, many tribes’ reservation lands do not include key 
areas in their ancestral home for important practices that depend on water quality. Thus, 
protecting the rights linked to their reservation land16 often is inadequate for addressing 
 
14 United States v. New Mexico, 438 U.S. 696 (1978). 
15 See In re. CSRBA Case No. 49576 Subcase No. 91-7755, 165 Idaho 517, 538-41 (2019) (discussing 
decisions applying and declining to apply primary-secondary standard to federal reserved rights for tribes, 
and determining not to apply the standard in Idaho); Agua Caliente Band of Cahuila Inidians v. Coachella 
Valley Water District, 949 F.3d 1262, 1268 (9th Cir. 2017) (applying primary-secondary standard). 
16 See In re. CSRBA Case No. 49576 Subcase No. 91-7755, 165 Idaho 517, 547-54 (2019) (discussing 
decisions applying and declining to apply instream federal reserved rights for tribes to flows off 
reservation, and determining rights not reserved off-reservation in case at hand) 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 6 - 
March 6, 2023 
the aquatic life and consumption purposes that USEPA’s proposed rule finds 
inadequately protected under existing procedures.17 
3. 
USEPA’s proposal to use a “tribal reserved rights” framework requires 
significant additional and unnecessary hurdles to timely adoption and 
implementation of water quality standard protections for tribal beneficial 
uses. 
By focusing on an assessment of tribal reserved rights,18 USEPA’s proposal adds 
multiple layers of unnecessary interpretation and analysis requiring expertise in areas 
far removed from the core expertise required to establish water quality standards.  
As a threshold issue, identification and interpretation of federal instruments that have 
the potential to create federal reserved rights is an uncertain exercise that requires 
expertise unrelated to water quality assessment. The proposed regulation carves a 
broad swath for identifying tribal reserved rights from treaties, statues, executive orders, 
or other sources of Federal law, noting that these rights may either be express or 
implied. (See 87 Fed. Reg. 74378, col. 2 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.3 (r).) Not noted in 
this recitation is the long history of changes in federal policies and ensuing litigation that 
overlie interpretation of any one document. Take for example, a treaty (or in the case of 
California, an executive order) establishing a reservation. Given the multiple waves of 
federal policies reducing tribal rights, it cannot be clear on the face of the document 
whether the reservation was subject to allotment, whether the tribe later faced 
termination, whether the Indian Claims Commission made payments in lieu of fulfilling 
the original document’s terms, or whether any of these actions was later reversed in one 
of the many individual or class action lawsuits challenging these federal actions. Thus, 
even if a scientist charged with establishing water quality standards can locate the 
appropriate historical instrument establishing a reservation, which itself requires specific 
research skills unrelated to water quality, this document provides little insight regarding 
present day rights. Additionally, for tribal lands established outside of the treaty 
process—which is all tribal lands in California—the founding instruments themselves 
are often brief and un-illuminating, making the identification of the rights reserved a 
further complex exercise of interpretation, requiring expertise unrelated to establishment 
and assessment of water quality requirements. 
The federal courts have grappled for decades with the difficult questions of how to 
interpret treaties, executive orders, and other federal actions establishing reservations, 
and the survival of the rights thereby established or reserved through various changes 
 
17See 87 Fed. Reg. 74371, col. 1. 
18 The proposed federal regulation states that “Tribal reserved rights as defined in this proposed 
rulemaking generally do not address the quantification of Winters rights.” (87 Fed. Reg. 74363, col. 2.) It 
is unclear what this statement means, as the regulation would require an evaluation of the existence and 
extent of tribally held federal reserved rights. Perhaps the word “quantification” was intended to indicate 
that the states will not be making a binding determination of the extent of the tribe’s rights. But while the 
evaluation amounts to an estimation, it is still as quantification, at least to the extent necessary to 
determine whether states water quality standards are protective of tribally held federal reserved rights. 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 7 - 
March 6, 2023 
in federal policy. In California, with more than 100federally recognized tribes, this would 
be an enormous undertaking. Forcing states to acquire such expertise rather than 
focusing on protecting the use for all tribal people (regardless of whether the use is an 
exercise of a tribal reserved right or not) presents a significant burden.  
Even after determining whether a tribal reserved right exists, determining the level of 
protection required for a right depends on the right’s priority, which adds significant 
additional and unnecessary complication. For example, if a reservation was established 
in the early 1900’s and was intended to provide for fishing, but upstream diversions prior 
to that date reduced flows and increased temperatures on the reservation lands to an 
extent that limits the ability to fish, the tribe’s federal reserved right may be junior to the 
right of the existing diverter, unless the tribe could establish a “time immemorial” priority 
date.19 Determining the water right priority of a federal reserved right, and its situation 
as compared to other water users, is a complex task. Where the federal reserved rights 
are not unquestionably among the most senior in a system, as will often be the case in 
California, a basin-wide assessment of senior demands is required to determine the 
scope and priority of a reserved right vis-à-vis other demands in the basin. Most states, 
including California, have not comprehensively adjudicated their waters. Absent such an 
existing adjudication, determining the extent to which a federal reserved right can be 
fulfilled, and what actions are available to fulfill it, is not straightforward; it involves 
expertise in water rights law that is distinct from the questions regarding the level of 
water quality required to support beneficial uses. Water right adjudications are for good 
reason considered one of the most complex analyses, often requiring decades of 
litigation.20 Similarly, if gold mining prior to establishment of a reservation has polluted a 
stretch of stream that runs through the area with significant amounts of mercury-laden 
sediments, it is not clear that the tribe’s federal reserved rights include a cleaner 
environment than initially provided. Assessing a hypothetical past condition of water 
quality and availability requires piecing together historic documents and information, but 
such an assessment is both unnecessary to establishing designated tribal uses and the 
level of water quality to protect those uses and is also unlikely to result in a 
determination with a high degree of certainty. Yet, USEPA’s proposed rule requires 
such a fruitless assessment. The Clean Water Act’s goal of fishable and swimmable 
waters does not tie these requirements to a specific right established at a specific time: 
requiring an analysis through a tribal-reserved-rights-lens adds significant complication 
to questions of water quality. 
 
19 See e.g. Winters v. United States, 207 US 564, 572, 575, 577 (1908) (the priority of tribal reserved 
water right is the date the reservation was established and this date is important because reserved rights 
extend only to those waters that were not already appropriated at the time the reservation was created); 
but see U.S. v. Adair, 723 F.2d 1394, 1412-1414 (9th Cir. 1983) (treaty continued pre-existing hunting 
and fishing rights, so date of priority pre-dates date of reservation).  
20 See, e.g., United States Department of Justice, Federal Reserved Water Rights and State Law Claims 
available at https://www.justice.gov/enrd/federal-reserved-water-rights-and-state-law-claims) (“…the 
majority of federal reserved water rights litigation has taken place, not before the United States Supreme 
Court, but in the state courts in the context of their comprehensive and on-going general stream 
adjudications—many of which spanned decades or more”). 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 8 - 
March 6, 2023 
Beyond the significant questions related to priority, centering a rights framework for 
water quality protection on tribal reserved rights unnecessarily requires interpretation of 
many areas of law that are undecided concerning implied rights. For example, it is not 
clear whether, and to what extent, federal reserved rights can extend beyond 
reservation lands absent a treaty articulating such a right.21 Where a source of pollution 
is upstream, or where downstream sources of pollution interfere with the ecosystem 
sustaining a tribal use, the question of whether and how a tribal reserved right extends 
off-reservation is vital in determining whether such right is being achieved or impeded. 
Yet it is irrelevant to the salient question under the Clean Water Act standard-setting of 
what level of water quality is required to support a designated use. Similarly, it is not 
clear whether, and to what extent, a tribal reserved right – or any federal reserved right 
– attaches to land that was purchased or originally reserved to the federal government 
for other purposes.22 In California, many of the federal acts establishing reservations 
occurred significantly after statehood, and involved purchase of private lands or re-
purposing of lands reserved under other statutes. State actions to set water quality 
standards are ill-suited to address these definitional issues regarding the status of 
federal reserved rights. Requiring state water quality regulators to address these 
questions, rather than focusing on water quality, unnecessarily burdens the states and 
creates barriers to adopting and implementing water quality standards. 
In addition to focusing state water quality regulators inappropriately on questions of 
rights rather than water quality, the USEPA’s proposal will also invite substantial 
opposition and water rights-based litigation into standard-setting processes. Questions 
regarding the scope and existence of federal reserved rights have significant 
implications for tribes, water right holders, and dischargers far beyond the scope of any 
single water quality standards-setting process in a particular basin. For example, what 
might seem a focused determination on a tribe’s rights within a basin, often implicates 
all reservations established under that statute, in watersheds across the state. Similarly, 
answering questions about the off-reservation extent of federal reserved rights or the 
scope or existence of federal reserved rights on purchased lands has statewide and 
nationwide implications. It is not appropriate or helpful to require state standards-setting 
in particular basins to also address these issues of statewide and national importance, 
 
21 See United States v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371 (1905) (finding easement to access fishing location 
reserved in treaty); In re. CSRBA Case No. 49576 Subcase No. 91-7755, 165 Idaho 517, 547-54 (2019) 
(discussing decisions applying and declining to apply instream federal reserved rights for tribes to flows 
off reservation, and determining rights not reserved off-reservation in case at hand). 
22 The United States Supreme Court defines the reserved rights doctrine as applying to lands withdrawn 
from the public domain. “The canonical statement of [the reserved water rights doctrine] goes as follows: 
‘[W]hen the Federal Government withdraws its land from the public domain and reserves it for a federal 
purpose, the Government, by implication, reserves appurtenant water then unappropriated ...” [Citing 
Cappaert v. United States, 426 U.S. 128, 138 (1976)]).” Sturgeon v. Frost, __ U.S. __, 139 S.Ct. 1066, 
1078 (2019) (emphasis added). The State Water Board knows of no cases that have reached the high 
court addressing the issue of whether, in the tribal context, reserved rights to purchased lands may 
accrue. 
 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 9 - 
March 6, 2023 
and doing so will substantially burden the states’ important work to implement the Clean 
Water Act.  
In light of these substantial burdens, the proposed rule underestimates the costs23 for 
this significant effort, by several orders of magnitude. As described above, the proposed 
rule will require developing substantial new areas of expertise in the uncertain field of 
tribal reserved rights (as opposed to water quality), and invites broad opposition and 
engagement from entities affected by determinations related to federal reserved rights 
(but not the water quality standards at issue). Equally unreasonable is the proposed 
rule’s suggesting that this Herculean effort should occur during a triennial review. The 
closest analogue to such a rights-determination process is the basin adjudication 
process in water rights, where the state courts assess reserved right claims alongside 
other claims to water use. These processes typically require at least a decade of 
litigation and require hundreds of thousands of dollars in state costs.24  As noted, there 
are about 110federally recognized tribes in California: the cost and time required to 
assess reserved rights for each of these is substantial and unwarranted in the water 
quality standard-setting process. 
The high cost and extensive time involved in evaluating tribal reserved rights is 
unwarranted because, in addition to being ineffective to address the health concerns 
related to tribal levels of consumption of aquatic species, as discussed in section 1 
above, it is not anticipated to result in significant changes to other existing water quality 
criteria. As USEPA acknowledges, “EPA does not anticipate that more stringent criteria 
to protect aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources themselves would be necessary in 
most cases to comply with this proposed rulemaking than already required by the 
existing federal water quality standards regulations.”25 
Requiring states to evaluate the existence and scope of tribal reserved rights is a 
burden far out of proportion to the limited potential benefits the proposed rule seeks to 
achieve. This is especially so where such exercise is unnecessary and ill-suited to 
address real health concerns related to consumption of aquatic species, and is 
conversely, and as stated by USEPA, unlikely to result in changes to other criteria. 
USEPA is a federal agency with trust responsibilities to tribes that extend to ensuring 
adequate protection of federal reserved rights, in addition to its water quality 
 
23 While this comment letter focuses on costs to states implementing the Clean Water Act, it is worth 
noting that the USEPA rule would also impose a significant cost burden on tribes, as developing a body of 
evidence to support establishment of a reserved right is significant. 
24 For example, the 1932 Shasta River Adjudication spanned eleven years, and the State Water Board’s 
costs were approximately $46,000, which is between $900,000 and $1.1 million today.  In 2019, the State 
Water Board estimated that the agency’s costs for an adjudication of approximately 300 water rights in 
the Fresno River Basin would be approximately $3 million dollars.  For more complex watersheds, the 
example of the Klamath Basin Adjudication in Oregon is instructive, with the administrative phase of the 
adjudication requiring 38 years.  
25 82 Fed. Reg., 74371, col. 1 (emphasis added). 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 10 - 
March 6, 2023 
responsibilities. USEPA can fulfill this role without conflating that responsibility for 
federal trust assets with its implementation of the Clean Water Act.  
4. 
Protection of tribal uses would be better served by focusing on the Clean 
Water Act’s traditional water quality standards framework, rather than a 
new tribal reserved rights framework. 
Water quality protections for tribal uses of waters can, and should, occur through the 
Clean Water Act’s existing traditional water quality standards framework, rather than an 
ill-suited new framework that is based on tribal reserved rights. Protecting tribal uses 
through the development or revision of traditional water quality standards, where 
needed to protect those uses, is consistent with the Clean Water Act authority.26 New 
requirements to protect tribal uses would be more effective in producing those 
protections if they were constructed within the traditional water quality standards 
framework. 
Under the Clean Water Act, designated uses and water quality criteria to protect those 
uses are the cornerstone of water quality protection for a given waterbody.27 USEPA’s 
regulations implementing the Act ensure that the waterbody’s highest degree of uses 
and the necessary levels of water quality actually achieved on or after November 28, 
1975, will be maintained and protected consistent with the overall objective of the Clean 
Water Act to restore and maintain the physical, chemical, and biological integrity of the 
nation’s waters. 
Water quality protections for the unique relationship tribes have with water and the 
environment can be established through designated uses and water quality criteria to 
protect those uses within a water quality standards framework. It is unnecessary to first 
determine whether tribal reserved rights apply and the level of water quality necessary 
to protect those rights, as contemplated by the proposed rule. 
USEPA’s proposed rule should focus on the tribal use of waters, not the federally 
established right to the use. As discussed in the following sections, there are many 
advantages to developing water quality protections for tribal uses under a traditional 
water quality standards framework unburdened by the need to determine tribal reserved 
rights. These advantages align with USEPA’s goal to support tribal sovereignty (87 Fed. 
Reg. 74377, col. 2) while also fitting within the existing framework and clear authority of 
the Clean Water Act. 
 
26 USEPA’s existing regulation at 40 C.F.R. section 131.10(i) generally requires states to revise their 
water quality standards to reflect presently attained uses if those uses require more stringent criteria than 
the currently designated uses. Therefore, if a tribal use is a use that is presently being attained and the 
currently designated uses require less stringent criteria than the tribal use, it would be consistent with the 
existing regulatory framework to require water quality standards to be revised to reflect the tribal use. 
27 Clean Water Act, § 303(c)(2)(A); 40 C.F.R. § 131.2. 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 11 - 
March 6, 2023 
A. The Clean Water Act’s existing framework requires states to identify 
and protect the uses specific to the waterbodies involved. 
The Clean Water Act and USEPA’s implementing regulations require states to establish 
designated uses reflecting general categories of uses specific to the navigable waters 
involved and water quality criteria to protect those uses.28 The statutory and regulatory 
framework require states to focus on appropriate water uses, taking into consideration 
the uses and values of the waterbodies under evaluation.29 That is, under existing law, 
the uses and suitability of the waterbody are examined, not the existence and scope of 
any tribal reserved rights. 
B. The use of waterbodies by all tribes within a state could be protected 
under a traditional standards framework. 
One advantage of requiring water quality protections for tribal uses under a traditional 
water quality standards framework is that all tribes within a state would be afforded the 
same water quality protections when applicable. This is approach is more equitable and 
efficient than requiring states to develop such protections for the limited subcategory of 
federally recognized tribes that have tribal reserved rights, as the proposed rule 
contemplates. Not only would a traditional water quality standards framework approach 
be far more equitable and meaningful, but it would also comport with the purposes of 
the Clean Water Act to protect uses of our nation’s waters. For example, a state’s water 
quality standards could protect at the same higher risk level for all tribes within a state 
that are engaged in similar higher consumption rates of fish based, rather than 
protecting only those tribes that are federally recognized. 
C. A full range of activities comprising the tribal traditions and lifeways 
could be protected under a traditional water quality standards 
framework. 
USEPA’s decision to tether the proposed rule to a rights-based approach will not 
adequately protect all the tribes’ uses of waters. All of a tribe’s activities and actual uses 
of a waterbody are not necessarily reflected by the tribal reserved right. In such cases, 
limiting water quality protections to only those tribal activities stemming from the tribal 
reserved right has the drawback of not reflecting all of the tribal uses actually being 
made of waterbodies. For example, tribes may engage in spiritual or ceremonial 
activities in or near waterbodies or gather aquatic plants. Such activities may fall outside 
the primary purpose of the reservation, and therefore, those uses are not covered in any 
reserved right, as discussed in section 2 above. USEPA attempts to paper-over these 
concerns in the preamble by noting “that implementing the [Clean Water Act] to give 
effect to applicable reserved rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources does 
not require that the relevant […] legal instrument explicitly reference water quality.” (87 
Fed. Reg. 74366, col. 1). This statement lacks consistency and transparency with 
 
28 Clean Water Act, § 303(c)(2)(A); 40 C.F.R. § 131.10(a). 
29 See ibid. 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 12 - 
March 6, 2023 
whether the full range of activities tribes make of the waters involved are recognized by 
the tribal reserved rights. 
By comparison, establishing water quality protections within a water quality standards 
regulatory framework can ensure that the full range of tribal traditions and lifeways 
tribes make on the relevant waters can be protected. Available data and information 
may be gathered to determine whether those uses are currently attainable or feasible to 
be attained, without regard to whether the uses are also embodied in tribal reserved 
rights. Proceeding under this approach would meaningfully respect tribal sovereignty. 
The tribes themselves know their unique relationship to waterbodies and the 
environment and should be given the platform suitable to their unique relationship. 
D. New water quality criteria are not needed if existing water quality 
criteria already protect tribal uses. 
Although different types of water quality criteria have a specific focus, a state’s water 
quality standards work cooperatively for the overall protection of a waterbody. For 
example, 40 C.F.R. section 131.11(a)(1) provides that where there are multiple 
designated uses adopted for a waterbody, states must adopt criteria that support the 
most sensitive use. Under this existing regulatory framework, states may evaluate 
whether more stringent water quality criteria are needed to protect the tribal designated 
uses including, for example, when tribal consumption or cultural use of aquatic species 
or other resources creates an elevated exposure pathway as compared to the general 
population. On the other hand, in many instances the water quality criteria that are 
already adopted for non-tribal uses may already fully support other tribal uses, in which 
case a state should not be required to expend its limited resources to establish new 
water quality criteria that are not more stringent than the existing water quality criteria. 
E. States are already well-equipped to designate uses to recognize 
tribal uses of waters and establish criteria necessary to protect the 
uses. 
USEPA’s proposal to add a new requirement that obligates states to examine the scope 
of tribal reserved rights would interfere with states that, like California, are already 
developing designated uses and water quality criteria to protect tribal uses. States are 
responsible for overseeing water quality programs necessary to administer the Clean 
Water Act. The states have decades of expertise in promulgating technical and 
scientific-intensive rules to make manifest the goals of the Act. Proceeding with a water 
quality standards approach fits within the water quality control planning expertise that 
states already possess, as well as the legally binding procedures for standards 
revisions states already have in place to comply with water quality standards 
submissions under 40 C.F.R. section 131.6. As explained in the next section, the State 
Water Board and California’s Regional Water Boards are actively engaged in evaluating 
and accounting for the technical and scientific basis to update water quality standards 
for the protection of tribal uses. 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 13 - 
March 6, 2023 
F. The State Water Board’s water quality standards action in 2017 
serves as an example of how states can protect tribal uses under 
existing authority. 
On May 2, 2017, the State Water Board established new designated uses for the 
explicit protection of uses of water by California Native American tribes.30 More 
specifically, the State Water Board adopted, and USEPA approved, the Tribal Tradition 
and Culture (“CUL”) beneficial use and the Tribal Subsistence Fishing (“T-SUB”) 
beneficial use.31 The State Water Board’s 2017 water quality standards action also 
included two human health numeric water quality criteria for mercury (expressed as 
concentrations of methylmercury in fish tissue) corresponding to the level of water 
quality to protect the CUL and T-SUB tribal beneficial uses.32 
The State Water Board developed the language of these tribal beneficial uses to include 
a full range of activities concerning tribal tradition, culture, and subsistence. The range 
of activities described by the tribal beneficial uses were informed by the uses made of 
waterbodies. California Native American tribes articulated these uses through 
resolutions adopted by tribes and submitted to the State Water Board, and as further 
articulated by tribal members, representatives, and interested parties during extensive 
public outreach over several years. Tellingly, the identification of the tribal uses made of 
waters and the relevant environment involved no inquiry whatsoever into tribal reserved 
rights. 
 
30 State Water Board Resolution No. 2017-0027 (May 2, 2017) (establishing Part 2 of the Water Quality 
Control Plan for Inland Surface Waters, Enclosed bays, and Estuaries of California—Tribal and 
Subsistence Fishing Beneficial Uses and Mercury Provisions) (hereinafter, “Part 2 Water Quality 
Standards to Protect Tribal Uses”); see Cal. Code Regs., tit. 23, § 3010 (providing a concise summary of 
the statewide water quality standards action); Tomas Torres, Director of the Water Division, USEPA 
Region IX, letter to Felicia Marcus, Chairperson of the State Water Resources Control Board (July 14, 
2017) (approving the statewide water quality standards action). 
31 The two beneficial uses for the protection of tribal uses are:  
Tribal Tradition and Culture (CUL): Uses of water that support the cultural, spiritual, 
ceremonial, or traditional rights or lifeways of California Native American Tribes, 
including, but not limited to: navigation, ceremonies, or fishing, gathering, or consumption 
of natural aquatic resources, including fish, shellfish, vegetation, and materials. 
Tribal Subsistence Fishing (T-SUB): Uses of water involving the non-commercial catching 
or gathering of natural aquatic resources, including fish and shellfish, for consumption by 
individuals, households, or communities of California Native American Tribes to meet 
needs for sustenance. 
(See, Part II Water Quality Standards to Protect Tribal Uses, ch. II.) The beneficial uses contain defined 
terms indicated by all capital letters that are not reflected here. 
32 See, Part II Water Quality Standards to Protect Tribal Uses, chs. III.2.a & III.2.a.b. The mercury water 
quality objective that corresponds to traditional fishing (i.e., the CUL beneficial use) was derived to protect 
consumption at a rate of one meal per week and is the same objective established to protect consumption 
by non-tribal people at recreational levels. The mercury T-SUB beneficial use was derived to protect 
people consuming four-to-five meals per week (142 grams per day) based on detailed information from a 
survey of fish consumption by California Native American Tribes. 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 14 - 
March 6, 2023 
With the development of the new tribal beneficial uses, the State Water Board 
recognized the importance of identifying and describing beneficial uses unique to 
California Native American tribes. Changes to California’s waters, hastened by the 
effects of climate change, along with new sources of contamination and pollution to 
those waters, present distinctive challenges to the tribes and their members. 
Establishing beneficial use categories designed to protect California Native American 
uses of waters is an important step to ensure that tribes have the opportunity to 
continue to practice their tribal tradition, culture, and lifeways. 
Since the State Water Board adopted the statewide designated uses to protect tribes, 
the nine Regional Water Boards are actively undertaking a full range of water quality 
control planning actions, including evaluating whether to amend their respective water 
quality control plans to incorporate the tribal beneficial uses, and beginning the work to 
designate specific waterbodies, as appropriate.33 The Regional Water Boards are 
engaged in substantial outreach efforts to solicit information from the California Native 
American tribes within their jurisdictions to determine the appropriate use designations 
for their waterbodies. 
Recommendation: The State Water Board is committed to evaluating or revising 
water quality standards as necessary to comply with the Clean Water Act to 
protect populations, including tribes, and aquatic life dependent on waters within 
California consistent with the goals of the Act. For the reasons discussed above, 
the State Water Board recommends that the protection of tribal activities be 
informed solely through a traditional water quality standards framework, rather 
than through a complex examination of tribal reserved rights. 
The State Water Board supports adding a new regulatory requirement that would 
require states to ensure their water quality standards protect tribal uses. As an 
alternative to the proposed rule’s focus on “tribal reserved rights,” the State 
Water Board recommends that section 40 C.F.R. section 131.10(a) be amended 
to add “tribal uses” to the enumerated uses that states must take into 
 
33 As of the date of this letter, the Regional Water Boards for the San Diego, Los Angeles, Central Valley, 
and Lahontan regions have adopted amendments to include the CUL, T-SUB, and SUB beneficial uses in 
their respective water quality control plans, and are actively engaged in projects to gather information to 
support designating specific waterbodies with one or more of the beneficial uses. The Regional Water 
Boards for the San Francisco and Colorado River regions have completed triennial review and have 
identified as priority projects incorporating the beneficial uses and designating specific waterbodies with 
the uses. The Regional Water Boards for the Santa Ana and Central Coast regions anticipate identifying 
as priority projects updates to incorporate the new beneficial uses. The North Coast Regional Water 
Board has not taken explicit action on the tribal beneficial uses because the region’s water quality control 
plan contains beneficial uses for Native American Cultural (“CUL”) uses and subsistence fishing (“FISH”) 
that predate the State Water Board’s 2017 water quality standards action. (North Coast Regional Water 
Board, Water Quality Control Plan for the North Coast (May 2011), p. 2-3.00.) Additionally, the North 
Coast Region designates numerous waterbodies or hydrologic areas or subareas with the CUL and FISH 
beneficial uses where the uses were determined to be existing or potential future uses. (Id., table 2-1.) 
The State Water Board has completed triennial review of the California Ocean Plan and has identified as 
a priority project incorporating the tribal beneficial uses into the plan and designating ocean waters with 
the uses. 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 15 - 
March 6, 2023 
consideration and protect. Additionally, the State Water Board recommends 
USEPA replace the proposed requirement to protect “tribal reserved rights” at 
section 131.9(a) and instead specify that states must protect tribal uses by 
“establishing tribal designated uses applicable to waters subject to such 
standards consistent with section 131.10.” The proposed rule could also direct 
states to “establish water quality criteria consistent with section 131.11 to protect 
tribal uses, as needed.” Finally, the proposed rule could require states to 
specifically evaluate the need to develop such standards during triennial review, 
and if appropriate, to prioritize the development and adoption of revised or new 
water quality standards to protect tribal uses.  
5. 
Additional comments to the proposed rulemaking. 
As stated above, the State Water Board strongly recommends that USEPA shift the 
focus of its proposed rule to a traditional water quality standards framework. In addition, 
there are two elements of the proposed rule that warrant specific comment. The first 
relates to USEPA’s new suppression effects concept. The second relates to USEPA’s 
cost estimates for water quality standards development, which is relevant under either 
framework. 
A. The requirement to account for “suppression effects” should be 
clarified. 
USEPA proposes to add section 131.9(a)(1) to require states’ water quality standards to 
protect tribal reserved rights “unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic 
or aquatic-dependent resource” where tribal reserved rights apply and where supported 
by available data and information. (40 Fed. Reg. 74378, col. 3.) USEPA explains in the 
preamble that a suppression effect would exist if, for example, fish are no longer 
available in that waterbody in historical quantities or kinds commensurate with what the 
tribe was entitled to in exercise of their treaty rights. (See 40 Fed. Reg. 74368, col. 3, 
and fn. 51.) 
In requiring states to account for suppression effects, the proposed rule introduces 
ambiguity as to the states’ obligation to protect and maintain baseline water quality 
conditions under the Clean Water Act. 
USEPA’s regulations define designated uses as those that “express the desired 
condition of the water and do not need to be currently attained to be designated.”34 
Additionally, existing uses are defined as “those uses actually attained in the waterbody 
on or after November 28, 1975, whether or not they are included in the water quality 
standards.”35 
 
34 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(f). 
35 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(e). With reference to an USEPA letter to the State of Oklahoma, USEPA asserts in 
the preamble to its proposed 2013 water quality standards rulemaking that “existing uses” are “known to 
be ‘attained’ when both the use and the water quality necessary to support the use has been achieved.” 
 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 16 - 
March 6, 2023 
USEPA’s water quality standards regulations set a high bar for protecting existing use of 
our nation’s navigable waters. 40 C.F.R. section 131.10(g) prohibits the removal of a 
designated use that would also remove an existing use. In addition, 40 C.F.R. section 
131.12(a) requires states to maintain and protect existing water uses and the level of 
water quality necessary to protect existing uses when implementing a state’s 
antidegradation policy. 40 C.F.R. section 131.10(g) further specifies that if a state 
adopts a new or revised water quality standard based on a use attainability analysis, the 
state must adopt the “highest” attainable use.36 
USEPA should clarify the extent to which a state would be required to revise or adopt 
water quality standards to protect tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality 
or availability of the aquatic resource for a tribal activity that has neither occurred nor 
where the water quality has not been achieved to support the activity since 
November 28, 1975, and where the activity is not feasible pursuant to the use 
attainability factors at 40 C.F.R. section 131.10(g). For example, if tribal navigation is no 
longer available in a waterbody because a dam or other type of hydrologic modification 
constructed prior to November 28, 1975, precludes navigation, it is unclear whether 
states would be obligated to protect that activity.  
Recommendation: If USEPA, against the State Water Board’s advice, moves 
forward under a “tribal reserved rights” framework, the State Water Board 
recommends that USEPA clarify in any proposed rule whether states are 
required to protect tribal uses or tribal reserved rights in their water quality 
standards where the tribal activity under consideration is neither an existing use 
(under 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(e)) nor feasibly attainable (under 40 C.F.R. 
§ 131.10(g)). 
B. The economic analysis should better account for the potential costs 
to states to evaluate or revise their water quality standards. 
Independent of whether the final rule includes a requirement for states to examine and 
protect tribal reserved rights, the economic analysis of the rulemaking should inform the 
public of the potential costs to states necessary to adopt revised or new water quality 
 
(70 Fed. Reg. 54518, 54523, col. 1 (Sept. 4, 2013) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. Part 131 ) (emphasis in 
the original) (referring to Denise Keehner, Director of Standards and Health Protection Division, USEPA, 
Letter to Derek Smithee, Water Resources Board, State of Oklahoma (Sept. 5, 2008) (with attachment), 
available at http://water.epa.gov/scitech/swguidance/standards/upload/Smithee-existing-uses-2008-09-
23.pdf).) 
36 “Highest attainable use” is defined as:  
the modified aquatic life, wildlife, or recreation use that is both closest to the uses 
specified in section 101(a)(2) of the Act and attainable, based on the evaluation of the 
factor(s) in § 131.10(g) that preclude(s) attainment of the use and any other information 
or analyses that were used to evaluate attainability. There is no required highest 
attainable use where the State demonstrates the relevant use specified in section 
101(a)(2) of the Act and sub-categories of such a use are not attainable. 
(40 C.F.R. § 131.3(m).) 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 17 - 
March 6, 2023 
standards. Such costs are a foreseeable outcome of the proposed rulemaking and are 
not speculative. USEPA’s analysis of the assumed administrative costs to the states to 
evaluate or revise water quality standards falls far short of what would be required. (87 
Fed. Reg. 74374, col. 1-2 [assuming states would each undertake three water quality 
standards rulemakings to comply with the proposed rule, one rulemaking for each of the 
following purposes: evaluating or revising water quality standards for the protection of 
human health and aquatic life, and accounting for other standards changes to protect 
tribal reserved rights, including information that emerges in the future that may inform 
the existence of, or level of protection for, tribal reserved rights].) USEPA’s assumed 
administrative burden on states entirely misses the mark. It woefully underestimates the 
number of rulemakings that would be required, but also the scope and number of hours 
for each rulemaking. 
There are multiple steps necessary to adopt revised or new water quality standards. 
The first formal step is often conducting triennial reviews to identify and prioritize waters 
for which uses should be designated or water quality criteria should be added or 
revised. Conducting a triennial review generally takes a year of effort. Within California, 
the nine Regional Water Boards conduct triennial reviews for water quality standards 
regarding waterbodies designated by ten water quality control plans and the State 
Water Board conducts triennial reviews on waters subject to its three statewide water 
quality control plans. Each triennial review would likely consider rulemaking actions to 
comply with the proposed rule, and such considerations may occur during multiple 
triennial reviews for each water quality control plan. 
The triennial review process is followed by gathering data and information to support the 
use designation(s) or the new or revised water quality criteria, on a waterbody-by 
waterbody or watershed basis, which is undertaken in collaboration and consultation 
with relevant stakeholders. Gathering data and information to inform the scope of the 
standards action can take several years. Although the rulemaking processes for 
designating uses and adding or revising water quality criteria, if necessary, can be done 
simultaneously, they are often undertaken separately as the data and information 
needed to support the actions vary in scale and type. For example, designating uses 
may require a survey of uses and may be undertaken across a region, while adding or 
revising a water quality criterion may require information on the route of exposure and 
length of exposure to calculate toxicity from a particular pollutant on a waterbody or 
multi-waterbody scale. 
Once the scope of the standards action and its justification are developed, the next 
steps include consideration of potential environmental impacts, consideration of 
economic impacts, public comment and response, a hearing held by a Regional Water 
Board followed by the Regional Water Board’s consideration and adoption, and public 
rulemaking review for approval by the State Water Board, prior to review by USEPA. 
Generally, these steps take two to three years at a minimum. Following approval comes 
the critical steps of training, educating, and transferring knowledge from planning to 
permitting staff and those who implement actions to attain standards. 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 18 - 
March 6, 2023 
Recommendation: The State Water Board recommends that USEPA’s cost 
analysis reasonably encompasses the numerous planning efforts and 
rulemakings states would be required to undertake an evaluation of water quality 
standards revisions necessary to protect tribal activities—on a waterbody or 
watershed basis throughout each state. 
C. USEPA should ensure that states’ subsequent submission of tribal 
designated uses—not based on “tribal reserved rights”—would be 
consistent with a final rule based on such rights. 
As already discussed, the Water Boards are actively involved in various stages of tribal 
water quality standards development, including waterbody designations based on the 
tribal use definitions established by the State Water Board in 2017 (i.e., the CUL and T-
SUB uses).37 The two corresponding water quality criteria for mercury established by 
the State Water Board will automatically apply to such designations, barring site-specific 
considerations. The State Water Board expects it will soon be considering tribal use 
designations of waterbodies adopted by Regional Water Boards, and will submit them to 
USEPA upon the State Water Board’s approval. 
Should USEPA find it necessary to promulgate a requirement for states to adopt water 
quality standards that protect tribal reserved rights, the State Water Board believes that 
the State Water Board’s subsequent submissions of water quality standards to USEPA 
based instead on its recently established and USEPA approved tribal beneficial use 
definitions framework would satisfy the requirement for consistency with proposed 40 
C.F.R. section 131.9 contained in proposed 40 C.F.R. section 131.5(a)(9). To avoid any 
ambiguity, however, the State Water Board requests that USEPA to affirm its 
concurrence (in the preamble or the final rule itself) that such subsequent submissions 
would satisfy the consistency standard. 
Alternatively, if USEPA finds that future submissions of tribal use designations and 
water quality criteria to protect tribal designated use would not meet the consistency 
requirement of proposed 40 C.F.R. section 131.5(a)(9), the State Water Board requests 
that USEPA include a grandfather provision in the final rule, so that states with an 
existing traditional water quality standards approach to protect tribal uses may continue 
establishing such water quality standards. 
Either of these approaches would preserve the states’ primary role in establishing water 
quality standards and allow states appropriate flexibility in water quality standards 
development, consistent with the purpose and spirit of the Clean Water Act. In 
overseeing water quality standards submissions, it is reasonable for USEPA to 
accommodate the states that have already forged ahead to implement the protection of 
tribal uses in their water quality programs. That is particularly true for states like 
California, where, as this letter details, establishing water quality protections for tribes 
under a tribal reserved rights framework is fraught with uncertainties at best and, in any 
case, not applicable to many of the state’s tribes. USEPA’s concurrence or 
 
37 See, supra, section 4.F and fn. 33. 

Administrator Michael S. Regan 
- 19 - 
March 6, 2023 
establishment of a grandfather provision as requested would also increase transparency 
and avoid potential ambiguity about the consistency requirement. Most importantly, both 
of these requested approaches comport with the important principles of cooperative 
federalism underlying the Clean Water Act. 
Recommendation: Should USEPA’s final rule be based on a “tribal 
reserved rights” framework, rather than a traditional water quality 
standards framework as recommended by the State Water Board, the 
State Water Board requests that USEPA confirm (in the final rule or 
preamble) that the State Water Board’s subsequent submissions to 
USEPA of tribal water quality standards based on its existing water quality 
standards framework meet the consistency requirement of proposed 40 
C.F.R. section 131.5(a)(9). 
Alternatively, if USEPA finds that such submissions of tribal water quality 
standards would not meet the consistency requirement of proposed 40 
C.F.R. section 131.5(a)(9), the State Water Board requests that USEPA 
include a grandfather provision in the final rule to ensure that states that 
are already implementing water quality protections for tribes solely through 
a traditional water quality standards approach may continue doing so. 
The State Water Board sincerely appreciates USEPA’s effort to propose water quality 
protections for tribes and USEPA’s consideration of the State Water Board’s 
recommendations. 
If you have any questions regarding these comments, please contact Senior Staff 
Counsel Marianna Aue at (916) 327-4440 or marianna.aue@waterboards.ca.gov, or 
Senior Staff Counsel Stacy Gillespie at (916) 341-5190 or 
stacy.gillespie@waterboards.ca.gov. 
Sincerely, 
 
Eileen Sobeck 
Executive Director 
State Water Resources Control Board

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0311 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Date: March 2nd, 2023
To: Michael S. Regan Administrator
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
EPA Docket Center, Office of Water Docket
Mail Code 28221T
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW 
Washington DC 20460
Dear Administrator Regan,
Regarding the proposed rule on the Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights. Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791
Thank you for allowing me the opportunity to comment on this proposed rule regarding the 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights. I am a Junior 
at the University of Minnesota majoring in Applied Economics with a minor in Sustainability. I 
am pleased to see that the EPA is taking necessary steps to preserving and maintaining clean 
water standards for tribal communities.
I support the EPA’s decision to include the reviewing of water quality standards in relation 
to how they effectively preserve tribal waters. The proposed revision of 40 CFR 131.5 
specifies that when reviewing new or revised standards the EPA would evaluate whether water 
quality standards sufficiently protect tribal reserved rights, where applicable (EPA 2022) This is 
especially relevant because protected waters are essential to indigenous communities and their 
ways of life.  The EPA defines this preservation and protection as taking into consideration their 
[Tribal Communities] use and value for public water supplies, propagation of fish and wildlife, 
recreational purposes, and agricultural, industrial, and other purposes (EPA 2022). I believe that 
it is vital that water quality standards must correspond with how Indigenous people use their 
waters. 
I support the call for the increase in tribal participation in water quality management. 
Since tribal communities are the ones most affected by these water quality issues tribal leaders 
should be included in the communication as to how these problems will be addressed. 
Tribal leaders have always taken charge of their own communities when in distress. For 
example, when the Covid-19 pandemic happened it shed more light on the need to address the 
ongoing problem of safe drinking water. As we know safe drinking water is needed for not only 
drinking, but handwashing and other hygienic needs and clean water helps reduce the risk for 
disease and virus transmissions like Covid-19. During the pandemic “The disparities in clean 
water between indigenous people and non-Hispanic white people lead to indigenous people 
contracting Covid-19 at a rate 3.5 times higher than non-Hispanic whites.”(Heather 2021). To 
combat this, some leaders in the different tribal communities drove water trucks around rural 
reservations to supply the community with clean water. There was a sense of dependency and 
trust that went into this operation that leaders in those communities were able to bring out. Trust 
and overall assurance will be needed when enacting the terms of this rule and by making sure 

that people who set the rules on water quality management look like the people who will reap the 
outcomes of it will make it that much easier for straightforward communication. So In regards to 
the proposed rule the EPA states that they are willing to encourage communication between 
states and the right holders of the specific tribal waters. I would like to know how exactly the 
EPA plans to do that.
I support the requirement that water quality standards must protect the health of tribal 
members to at least the same degree as the general population in that specific state. 
Tribal communities' water systems are not tested at the same level as other water systems in the 
United States. Prioritizing some water systems over another can make the latter more at risk for 
waterborne diseases leading to poorer health. A study done by the PFAS Project Lab at 
Northeastern University revealed the frequency of water systems tested for samples of “forever 
chemicals” by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. The study showed that non Tribal 
water systems were tested and sampled in search of PFAS chemicals at a rate of 2 times more 
than Tribal water systems (Schulte and Vaisvilas 2022) Per- and Polyfluorinated Substances 
(PFAS) chemicals are dubbed the “forever chemicals”, which are chemicals that last for 
thousands of years or more and cause multiple serious health problems. This study is important 
because it shows how the EPA is not upholding the same water quality standards in tribal 
communities as others. By not testing water systems at the same rate as others makes it more 
likely for the government to overly look at any potentially contaminated waters. By enacting the 
requirement of protecting the health of Tribal communities at the same degree of other 
populations would make water quality testing more consistent throughout the United States.  
I support the economic findings of the potential burdens and costs to this proposed rule.
The rule proposed mentions that protecting tribal waters would be more cost effective and 
resource effective in the long run than investing in restoration activities in future. The one-time 
cost for this proposal is estimated to be around $989,112- $4,945,562 along with the estimated 
burden hours of 13,250-44,250 (EPA 2022) which is about 1.5-5 years does not outweigh the 
benefits brought on by this rule. The benefits of creating a framework of higher water quality 
standards not just for tribal communities but for non tribal communities as well should be 
prioritized.

References
EPA Press Office. “EPA Announces Proposal to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights in Water Quality 
Standards and Best Practices for Tribal Treaty and Reserved Rights.” EPA, Environmental 
Protection Agency, https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-announces-proposal-protect-tribal-
reserved-rights-water-quality-standards-and-best.
Morales, Laurel. “For Many Navajo, a Visit from the 'Water Lady' Is a Refreshing Sight.” NPR, 
NPR, 6 Jan. 2015, https://www.npr.org/sections/codeswitch/2015/01/06/374584452/for-many-
of-navajo-nation-water-delivery-comes-monthly.
Schulte, Laura, and Frank Vaisvilas. “Testing for 'Forever Chemicals' Lacking for Tribal Water 
Systems.” Journal Sentinel, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, 15 Dec. 2022, 
https://www.jsonline.com/story/news/2022/12/14/testing-for-forever-chemicals-lacking-for-
tribal-water-systems/69726206007/.
Tanana, Heather. “Water Is Life: Law, Systemic Racism, and Water Security in Indian ...” Mary 
Ann Liebert Inc, 17 June 2021, https://www.liebertpub.com/doi/10.1089/hs.2021.0034.
Tebor, Celina. “On Native American Reservations, the Push for More Clean Water and 
Sanitation.” Los Angeles Times, Los Angeles Times, 26 June 2021, 
https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/story/2021-06-26/native-americans-clean-
water#:~:text=Many%20Native%20Americans%20don't,kills%20viruses%2C%20bacteria%20a
nd%20parasites.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0275 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
MILLE LACS BAND OF OJIBWE 
Executive Branch of Tribal Government 
 
 
 
 
DISTRICT I 
DISTRICT II 
DISTRICT IIA 
43408 Oodena Drive   Onamia, MN 56359 
36666 State Highway 65   McGregor, MN 55760 
2605 Chiminising Drive Isle, MN 56342 
 
(320) 532-4181   Fax (320) 532-4209 
(218) 768-3311   Fax (218) 768-3903 
(320) 676-1102   Fax (320) 676-3432 
 
 
 
DISTRICT III 
 
URBAN OFFICE 
 
 
45749 Grace Lake Road Sandstone, MN 55072 
 
1404 East Franklin Avenue Minneapolis, MN 55404 
 
 
 
(320) 384-6240   Fax (320) 384-6190 
 
(612)872-1424   Fax (612) 872-1257 
 
March 6, 2023 
 
FILED: REGULATIONS.GOV 
 
Michael Regan, Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions 
to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
The Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe submits these comments regarding protecting Tribal 
reserved rights in Water Quality Standards (WQS). We respectfully request that these comments 
be included in the official comment record to Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791: Water 
Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights. 
The Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe (Band) is a federally-recognized American Indian Tribe 
located in east-central Minnesota, with adjudicated reserved rights by retaining “[t]he privilege 
of hunting, fishing, and gathering the wild rice [manoomin; Zizania palustris], upon the lands, 
the rivers and the lakes included in the territory ceded” in the 1837 Treaty of St. Peters (7 Stat. 
536) and in the 1842 Treaty of La Pointe (7 Stat. 591), of what today are Minnesota, Wisconsin, 
and Michigan, so that we could continue our  bimaadiziwin or traditional lifeways in a manner 
that meets our subsistence, economic, cultural, medicinal, and spiritual needs.  The full exercise 
of these lifeways require access to clean, healthy, and abundant natural resources, which in turn 
requires clean water to thrive.  As a member of the Great Lakes Indian Fish and Wildlife 
Commission (GLIFWC), we coordinate with other member Tribes and with the States in co-
managing treaty-protected resources.  Additionally, our Tribal band members who possess a 
valid Tribal identification card from a federally-recognized Tribe located in Minnesota, our 
citizens are deemed to have a license to harvest manoomin anywhere within the State of 
Minnesota, per Minnesota Wild Rice Regulations. With these comments, we will remind EPA 
that although Tribes and intertribal agencies representing Tribes may submit comments during 
this public comment period, we must not be treated as other stake-holders who act as public 
commenters, but as the sovereign governments that we are. We are pleased to submit our 

 
 
 
Comment Letter on  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe 
 
2 
 
comments to the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in your effort in 
enacting WQS regulatory revisions to protect Tribal reserved rights. 
As stated in our comment letter to you on this topic back on September 13, 2021, the 
Band is fully supportive of the EPA’s effort to bring about WQS that are protective of Tribal 
subsistence practices. The Band believes that this action by the EPA reflects the manner in which 
the Clean Water Act was intended to protect the health of people and the health of the 
environment, because clean water is fundamental to life and is the onji-mashkiki or the first 
medicine, the blood of our mother, Earth. 
First of our concerns is in regards to the State of Minnesota having EPA-approved WQS, 
but the State repeatedly failing to enforce the EPA-approved standards that are on their books.  
We have expressed this concern already in our 2021 letter, but we would like to express it once 
again, as it is of the utmost importance.  For many years, the Mille Lacs Band and other Tribes in 
Minnesota have asked the State of Minnesota to ensure protection of these waters in our treaty-
ceded territories through listing of impaired waters per the Clean Water Act Section 303(d) and 
to establish the appropriate Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDLs) protective of those listed 
waters. We have further repeatedly requested that the State properly designate and enforce State 
Class 3 and 4 WQS and that the State enforce the municipal and industrial wastewater discharge 
limits set under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program. 
As you recall, the State had declined our request for approximately ten years. After EPA 
conducted consultation sessions with Tribal governments as part of its review of the State’s 
WQS review, EPA agreed with the Tribes’ position and has added certain bodies of water to the 
various waters lists.  Since that time, the State has moved to list these waters and additional 
waters.  However, the State is still reluctant in enforcing the EPA-approved WQS.  We thank the 
EPA for respecting the Tribes’ unique needs for enhanced water quality for subsistence living, 
and by having Tribes cooperatively working together with the State and EPA on a government-
to-government basis, we have inched the State to do what is right for the health of the people and 
for the environment.  But we must continue to encourage the State in the enforcement of those 
WQS so the full intent of the Clean Water Act can be realized.  Please also note that in order for 
Tribes to adequately participate, review, and make comments and request to the State in their 
triennial review process, it is a significant burden on Tribes, but we do this because it is of great 
importance to us to protect our reserved rights resources by ensuring that the States do their job 
in water quality protection. 
We have other concerns that we would like to share with you today that we did not 
express in our 2021 letter. In order to ensure water quality protection in our treaty-ceded 
territories, Tribes may need additional personnel to work closely with our State partners so that 
we can ensure our shared resources are cared for properly. Currently, there are monies made 
available through the Great Lakes Restoration Initiative (GLRI) for waters within the Great 
Lakes basin, but no such pots of monies are available for the Mississippi River basin. Minnesota 
Fourth Congressional District Representative Betty McCollum has introduced a bill for the 
Mississippi River Restoration and Resilience Initiative (MRRRI; H.R. 4202), which potentially 
can provide funds to States, Tribes, and Local governments—and even to non-governmental 
organizations—to allow the fund recipients to jointly perform water quality protection work in 
the Mississippi River basin similar to how GLRI does within the Great Lakes basin.  For Tribes, 
funding such as these are critical because without funding support, we cannot hire and retain 

 
 
 
Comment Letter on  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe 
 
3 
 
qualified individuals to perform this needed work in ensuring WQS that are protective of our 
treaty reserved rights in safeguarding our treaty protected resources. 
Additionally, without reliable and sustained funding, Tribes cannot hire the staff for their 
water programs that are needed to conduct our most basic analysis on water bodies with a nexus 
to the Reservation.  Having project funds made available for only 2- to 4-years may accomplish 
project goals, but projects alone do not sustain Tribal water programs.  Without funding for 
Tribal water programs to retain staff, Tribes are not able to go after project funding. This is an 
on-going issue, and adds to the burden of monitoring treaty-ceded territories where we exercise 
our reserved rights. 
Next, in addition to the rights to hunt, fish, and gather, Tribal reserved rights may include 
all sorts of other resource gathering methods such as trapping and agriculture, or ensuring our 
cultural landscapes and sacred sites are protected for ceremonial and cultural uses.  Our 
Anishinaabe gikinoo’amaadiwin or traditional teachings provide a good framework to 
demonstrate how adverse impacts on water can impact the cultural, ceremonial, and overall well-
being of plants, wildlife, and people.  Our teachings speak of four orders of creation.  They are 
the order in which the beings on Mother Earth were created were: (1) the elements, which 
includes air, energy, land, and water; (2) plants and other non-animal life; (3) non-human 
animals; and (4) us humans. According to our gikinoo’amaadiwin, each of the orders can exist 
and survive without those that come after it, but cannot exist without those that come before it.  
In this way, water is an elder sibling and teacher to us Anishinaabeg.  We humans depend on 
water both directly and indirectly, and plants and non-human animals rely on it as well.  As a 
creation of the first order, water is our relative that has generations of memory and knowledge to 
teach us.  Water is a sacred element, and water-dwelling and water dependent plants and animals 
are particularly sacred and greatly influenced our bimaadiziwin, tying many Tribal communities 
to each of our historic homelands. Consequently, we would like to point out to the EPA that all 
these constitute “beneficial use of water” for us.  In Peace and Friendship treaties, the phrase “As 
long as the Sun shines, the Rivers flow and the Grass grows, ...” is used, first appearing in the 
Tawagonshi Agreement of 1613 between the Five Iroquois Nations and the Republic of the 
Seven United Netherlands, and since then, the variations of that phrase were implemented by the 
governments of United Kingdom, United States, and Canada.  With this language, we and other 
Tribes believed at the time treaties were signed that the reserved resources would be usable—i.e., 
air would be clean to breathe, fish are safe to eat, water is safe to drink and bathe in, and plants 
are not genetically modified.  These ideas we like to note are canons of construction of Indian 
law, and it dictates that EPA must consider those Tribal needs based on the above understanding 
of reserved resource access. 
Next, EPA must recognize that the federal government’s treaty obligations and trust 
responsibility cannot be delegated to any other entity, including to the states – even when states 
assume responsibilities under a federal program.  The Proposed Rule, as written, implies that 
states will make several determinations regarding Tribal reserved rights.  These include making 
determinations about whether rights exist, and the geographic extent of those rights.  This is an 
especially egregious and impermissible delegation of federal responsibility because a substantial 
amount of information regarding treaty rights could come from Indigenous knowledge 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK), and the Proposed Rule is silent regarding the weight 
that should be given to TEK.  In other words, it is possible that states would determine that 

 
 
 
Comment Letter on  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe 
 
4 
 
information provided through TEK—usually in the form of our inaajimowin or stories—would 
be treated with less value than what is provided through western scientific data – a medium most 
are more familiar and therefore comfortable with.  The inherent risk is that states will make 
determinations regarding Tribal reserved rights that exceed their authority, potentially making 
legal determinations that will curtail Tribal rights into the future.  The EPA must ensure that this 
Rule does not delegate final decision-making authority regarding the existence and extent of 
Tribal reserved rights – an especially fraught possibility in cases in which treaty rights have not 
yet been adjudicated. Historically, Tribes and states have ideologically differed on approaching 
water quality management, from how climate change will impact water resources, to cumulative 
impacts.  The often-differing approaches have the potential to lead to conflicting data and 
priorities, as well as different standards for designated uses.  As part of its federal treaty 
obligations and trust responsibility, the EPA must ensure that states do not run roughshod over 
any conflicting data or competing ideologies that come from Tribes in regards to our Tribal 
reserved rights.  This Proposed Rule must make clear how such differences will be addressed and 
resolved.   
Next, we would also like to share with you that under the current EPA funding 
mechanism for Tribal water quality protection only allows for Tribes to do work only in Indian 
Country, limiting us to do water quality protection on our Indian Reservations and on our Indian 
Trust lands, cutting off the Tribes from ensuring States are actually doing the water protection 
Tribes need to protect our reserved rights on a daily basis.  Processes outlined in the Proposed 
Rule leave Tribes in a position of relying on states to accurately collect and interpret information 
from tribes.  This is especially troublesome in the many parts of the Proposed Rule where the 
EPA merely states that the state should communicate with Tribes and should balance competing 
lines of inquiry.  Consequently, Tribes have little to no water quality data in these critical off-
Reservation areas, and are nearly completely reliant on State water quality data, if States have 
conducted sampling in these critical off-Reservation waters.  Even if we have the opportunity to 
adequately participate in their triennial review process, this level of participation is too 
infrequent for us, making us even more reliant on TEK for these reserved rights areas to fill in 
the data gap.  If Tribes are truly co-managers with the States in these off-Reservation waters as 
the courts have ruled, then the water protection funds Tribes receive must allow for Tribes to 
assist States in monitoring for these off-Reservation waters, and allow for adequate staffing so 
that the water quality protection can be carried out together with the States in protecting our 
common water resources.  If this cannot be achieved, then this process does not differ 
substantially from the current rule or processes undertaken by states, and does not go far enough 
to ensure that Tribal reserved rights are adequately considered in the development of new WQS.  
EPA must acknowledge that the nature and scope of many treaty rights have been the subject of 
sometimes decades-long court battles, and the determination of the scope, location, and manner 
of the exercise of the rights may be controversial and be met with resistance by states.  With this 
in mind, we would like to recommend to the EPA that: 
• 
The final rule should ensure that there is a system by which a minimum threshold for 
state engagement with rights holders is developed, and by which a uniform process for 
consideration of tribal reserved rights is developed.   
• 
The final rule should also create a system by which there is a minimum threshold of 
engagement between EPA and tribes to ensure the EPA retains its federal trust 
responsibility and does not improperly rely on the states. 

Comment Letter on 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe 
• 
EPA must require states to communicate early and often with tribes throughout their 
WQS processes. 
• 
The EPA must make clear that competing lines of inquiry must be balanced between the 
states and tribes. 
Finally, we also have concerns that the Federal Register notice is silent on what occurs 
when states and Tribes disagree. The Proposed Rule lacks any clear teeth to ensure that the 
states are giving the appropriate weight to the points of view of Tribes or other rights holders. 
While, ultimately, the EPA must approve state WQS, and these regulations would require Tribal 
reserved rights are considered in the process before new or updated WQS are approved, that is 
not enough. At the least, the final rule should explicitly require states to show how the 
information and data provided by Tribes were considered in the various processes outlined in this 
Proposed Rule. Additionally, the final rule should make clear that the information provided by 
Tribes and other rights holders, specifically including information that was provided through 
TEK processes must be weighted equally to the information provided by states and through 
western scientific processes. 
Thank you for your consideration of the views of the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe 
regarding the EPA's effort in enacting WQS regulatory revisions to protect Tribal reserved 
rights. If you have questions or would like to continue this discussion, please feel free to contact 
us and request a formal government-to-government consultation. 
Sincerely, 
Kelly Applegate 
Commissioner of Natural Resources 
cc: 
Susan Klapel, Executive Director, Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe DNR 
Perry Bunting, Director of Environmental Programs, Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe DNR 
Chad Weiss, Water Resource Manager, Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe DNR 
Ann McCammon Solis, Division of Intergovernmental Affairs Director, GLIFWC 
5

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0249 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
QUAPAW NATION 
 
 
 P.O. Box 765 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        (918) 542-1853   
 Quapaw, OK 74363-0765 
                                                                                                                                            FAX (918) 542-4694 
 
 
 
March 6, 2023 
 
Jennifer Brundage 
U.S. EPA Headquarters, Office of Water 
1301 Constitution Avenue NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
Brundage.Jennifer@epa.gov 
 
Re: EPA’s proposal to revise the regulations related Clean Water Act (CWA) specific 
to protect “tribal reserved rights”. 
 
Dear Ms. Brundage, 
 
EPA’s proposed regulation clarifies that where tribal reserved rights exist, states must 
account for those rights in revising their designated uses, criteria, and/or antidegradation 
provisions. 
 
The proposal further specifies that WQS must protect unsuppressed use of any reserved 
resources. Determining the unsuppressed level requires considering past, present, and future 
use of the resource, along with what is currently reasonable to achieve for the waterbody.  
 
The proposal would also require that WQS protect the health of the tribal members 
exercising reserved rights to at least the same risk level at which the general population of 
the state would otherwise be protected. EPA anticipates the primary application of this 
provision to be in determining the appropriate cancer risk level when deriving criteria to 
protect human health.  
 
EPA is proposing that state WQS submissions must include documentation of the state’s 
efforts to obtain information about the existence of any applicable tribal reserved rights, 
their current and past use, scope, and nature, as well as the level of water quality that 
protects those rights. Additionally, the rule would require states to re-evaluate whether WQS 
need to be revised to protect any applicable tribal reserved rights at each triennial WQS 
review.  
 
Finally, the proposed rule would require EPA to initiate tribal consultation with the right 
holders when reviewing WQS submissions to determine whether state WQS protect 
applicable reserved rights. 
 
 
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: BF36720F-0276-4F25-B86E-92124DAD55AB

 
 
 
Comments/questions from the Quapaw Nation related to these proposed revisions to 
the CWA: 
1. 
In light of the Supreme Court’s decision in McGirt v. Oklahoma, 207 L. Ed. 2d 985, 
140 S. Ct. 2452 (2020) regarding the status of reservations in Oklahoma, the Quapaw Nation 
(the “Nation”) reserves its rights to protect its water by virtue of our sovereignty as an 
ancient tribal people, which has been recognized and acknowledge by the United States as 
well as Article 25 and 32 of the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous 
Peoples. Aside from an implicit and inherent right, the 1833 Treaty with the Quapaw, 7 Stat. 
424 (May 13, 1833), and the 1867 Treaty with the Seneca, Mixed Seneca, and Shawnee, 
Quapaw, etc., 15 Stat. 513 (Feb. 23, 1867) guaranteed the Quapaw Nation its current home 
as a reservation, which the Oklahoma Court of Criminal Appeals recently reaffirmed. See 
Oklahoma v. Lawhorn, S-2020-858 (2021 OK CR 37).   
 
a. 
As the Nation’s water rights were never disestablished in treaty or elsewhere, 
the Nation ultimately wants to know how these proposed revisions provide greater 
protection to its water rights? 
 
b. 
Did the EPA recognize and consider the Nation’s water rights as it considered 
the referenced revisions to the CWA?  
 
c. 
In consideration of cases like Winters v. United States, 207 U.S. 564 (1908) 
and Choctaw Nation v. Oklahoma, 397 U.S. 620, 635 (1970), does the EPA currently 
recognize the Nation’s water rights as preserved for purposes of implementing the 
referenced revisions to the CWA? 
 
2. 
The 2005 SAFETEA Rider authorized the state of OK to administer environmental 
regulatory programs in certain areas of “Indian Country”. On October 1, 2020, the EPA 
approved Oklahoma’s SAFETEA request to administer all the State’s EPA-approved 
environmental regulatory programs in the requested areas of Indian country. As requested 
by ODEQ, the EPA’s approval under SAFETEA does not include Indian country lands, 
including rights-of-way running through the same, that: (1) qualify as Indian allotments, the 
Indian titles to which have not been extinguished, under 18 U.S.C. § 1151(c); (2) are held in 
trust by the United States on behalf of an individual Indian or Tribe; or (3) are owned in fee 
by a Tribe, if the Tribe (a) acquired that fee title to such land, or an area that included such 
land, in accordance with a treaty with the United States to which such Tribe was a party, and 
(b) never allotted the land to a member or citizen of the Tribe (collectively “excluded Indian 
country lands”).  This 2020 approval also provided that future revisions or amendments to 
Oklahoma’s approved environmental regulatory programs would extend to the covered 
areas of Indian country (without any further need for additional requests under SAFETEA). 
This approval appears to be in direct opposition to the proposed tribal-related revisions to 
the CWA. For example, how would EPA expect to enforce the new revisions  that would 
require states to re-evaluate whether WQS need to be revised to protect any applicable tribal 
reserved rights at each of Oklahoma’s triennial WQS review? It appears that EPA has 
abrogated their responsibility to approve/disapprove continued delegated authority to  
implement environmental programs (under the CWA, CAA, etc..) through this approval of 
Oklahoma’s SAFETEA request. It is surprising that EPA would concede this authority even 
though SAFETEA does not eliminate, or in any way limit, this authority. The Nation 
requests a written response to this concern, and government-to-government consultation to 
address these issues. 
DocuSign Envelope ID: BF36720F-0276-4F25-B86E-92124DAD55AB

 
 
 
3. 
On December 22, 2021, the EPA proposed to withdraw and reconsider Oklahoma’s 
2020 SAFETEA approval request as it relates to tribal environmental programs. What is the 
status of this withdraw consideration?  
 
4. 
The Nation has internally approved Water Quality Standards(WQS). These standards 
largely mirror the State’s standards; but differ in the Beneficial Use designations of water 
bodies within the reservation. The Nation was working with EPA and in accordance with 
EPA’s requirements,  to establish enforceable WQS until the passing of the SAFETEA in 
2005. When can the Nation expect to continue this process with EPA? Among other benefits 
to public health and environment, establishing WQS that are protective of the Nation and the 
affected communities of Ottawa County would result in significant progress toward the 
Nation’s efforts to accomplish the best possible cleanup of the Tar Creek Superfund site. 
 
We appreciate your time and commitment to these very important issues in Indian Country 
and most importantly to hear our concerns and recommendations within the Quapaw Nation 
regarding treaty reserved rights. If you have any further questions or need clarification to 
these comments, please reach out to the Environmental Director, Craig Kreman at 
ckreman@quapawnation.com. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Joseph T. Byrd, Chairman 
Quapaw Nation 
 
Cc:  
Deborah Nagle, U.S. EPA Headquarters, Office of Water, Washington, D.C. 
Quapaw Nation Business Committee 
Tim Kent, Quapaw Nation Environmental Protection Commissioner 
 
DocuSign Envelope ID: BF36720F-0276-4F25-B86E-92124DAD55AB

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0246 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
 
Jennifer Brundage 
Standards and Health Protection Division 
Office of Water (4305T)  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
 
RE:  
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights Docket Number EPA-HQ-
OW-2021-0791 FRL-8599-01-OW 
 
Dear Ms. Brundage: 
 
On behalf of the states of the Northeast,1 NEIWPCC appreciates the opportunity to submit comments regarding the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) Clean Water Act (CWA) Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights.   
 
Established by an Act of Congress in 1947,2 NEIWPCC is a not-for-profit regional commission that helps the states of the 
Northeast preserve and advance water quality. We support state water programs across New England and New York 
responsible for administering programs under the Clean Water Act in five key ways: (1) engaging and convening water 
quality professionals and other stakeholders; (2) implementing and funding research, environmental monitoring, 
restoration, and other on-the-ground projects; (3) training water quality professionals; (4) funding and/or staffing 
programs that engage the public; (5) representing the interests of member states at the local, regional and national level.  
 
States acknowledge the importance of ongoing communications between tribes and EPA regarding Tribal Reserved 
Rights. They appreciate the spirit of the proposed rule but have concerns related to its scope and implementation. 
States would be responsible for carrying out the proposed rule, and it appears that EPA did not conduct appropriate 
outreach directly to states during the development process. States would like a process or statement about how they 
will be included in future conversations relevant to this rule making to facilitate the execution of the rule at the state 
level.   
 
States have long established water quality standards using accepted procedures under EPA guidance. EPA’s current 
regulations do not explicitly require consideration of treaty rights in setting water quality standards. However, EPA has 
tried to incorporate reserved tribal treaty rights and rights provided by and other applicable laws and documents into 
 
1 These comments are made by NEIWPCC on behalf of the six New England states. Additionally, while not a member NEIWPCC collaborated 
with New Jersey DEP on the contents of this comment letter. Our individual member states may also provide comment letters with 
additional noteworthy guidance and advice to consider. Nothing in these NEIWPCC comments is intended to limit any individual state 
comments. 
2 NEIWPCC is a body corporate and politic established under an interstate compact negotiated and ratified by the New England states and 
the state of New York under Public Resolution 104, Seventy-fourth Congress, approved June 8, 1936, and consented to and approved by 
Congress under Public Law 80-292, July 31, 1947, with powers and duties relating to the control and reduction of pollution of the interstate 
waters of New England and New York. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
–2– 
the water quality standards program since 2015.3  EPA’s proposed 2023 Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions 
to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights seeks to: 
 
i. amend EPA’s current water quality standard regulations to require states, tribes, and the federal government to 
consider treaty rights when setting water quality standards, and  
 
ii. provide a regulatory framework for setting water quality standards in a manner that “protect(s) aquatic and 
aquatic-dependent resources reserved to tribes through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of 
Federal law.”   
 
EPA explains that tribal reserved rights may apply to waters in Indian country as well as outside of Indian country, and 
such rights may be express or implied. The proposed rule, if adopted, will have major impacts in states where federally 
recognized tribes hold rights to aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources in waters subject to state water quality 
standards.   
 
State – Tribe Working Relationships 
States would like to acknowledge they each navigate a unique landscape as it relates to their working relationships with 
tribes. Many states have specific settlements with tribes or legal land agreements with tribes, and there is concern 
around the intersection of those unique settlements with this national regulation. For example, in Rhode Island, the 
Narragansett Tribe’s 1,800-acre Settlement Lands are governed by State civil and criminal laws and jurisdiction (25 
U.S.C. 1708(a)) which would include laws governing water quality and the associated regulations. Maine also has a 
nationally unique tribal-state relationship set forth in state and federal laws, including the Maine Implementing Act, 30 
M.R.S. §§ 6201-6214 (2011 & Supp. 2022), and the Maine Indian Land Claims Settlement Act, 25 U.S.C. §§ 1721-1735 
(MICSA). These examples highlight the varied nature of state-tribe interactions. Because of these unique, case-by-case 
conditions, the proposed rule would add regulatory uncertainty to an already complicated legislative landscape. 
 
This point is echoed in the Summary Report of Tribal Consultation for the Proposed Rule: Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights where commenters asked: “how EPA will ensure the regulation is 
flexible enough to accommodate different treaties and other relevant sources of law.” States would like to know how 
EPA has considered or plans to consider specific settlement acts and other relevant sources of law as they relate to this 
proposed rule.   
 
Similarly, states each navigate unique relationships with state recognized tribes. States would like to know how the 
proposed rule would impact tribes that are recognized at the state level. Are these tribes being considered and how 
should states handle these tribes under the proposed rule? States would like written guidance on any potential impacts 
on state recognized tribes and how to consider their uses in state water quality standards programs.  
 
Identification of Tribal Reserved Rights 
States need more information before fully commenting on the specific text of the proposed rule. This information 
includes but is not limited to, which tribes and a fuller understanding of the rights specifically covered under the 
proposed ruling, the specific boundaries of lands impacted by the rule with reference to relevant mapping tools, which 
waters will be considered and if it is limited to those wholly within trust lands or reservations, and whether this ruling 
extends to water related uses other than fish consumption and foraging. Without this information states are not able to 
 
3 See, Promulgation of Certain Federal Water Quality Standards Applicable to Maine, 81 FR 92466 (December 19, 2016), and Revision of 
Certain Federal Water Quality Criteria Applicable to Washington, 81 FR 85417 (December 28, 2016). Please see Maine’s comments for this 
proposed rule submitted separately for additional details and comments. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
–3– 
determine how this proposed rule will impact their workload and implementation of water quality standards at the 
state level.  
  
Execution of this proposed rule depends on defining the extent and intricacies of federally recognized tribal reserved 
rights. With this in mind, tribal reserved rights should be identified by the federal agencies with the appropriate 
expertise in advance of propagation of the proposed rule. Federal agencies are in the best position to create a database 
of federal treaties, statutes, executive orders, judicial decisions, and any other sources of federal tribal reserved rights, 
not the individual states. Such a database would address what the tribal reserved rights are, their scope, and to which 
waters they apply. We suggest that the responsible federal agencies update such a database as needed, and that EPA 
shares it early in the states’ triennial review process. This approach would also be consistent with the description of 
EPA’s responsibilities in the preamble.  
 
Defining Tribal Reserved Rights and Unsuppressed Rights 
States would like guidance from EPA on available resources and best practices to gather necessary information about 
current and past uses, scope, and nature of past and current uses which would be necessary under this rule. States 
would also like to know what resources will be allocated by EPA to obtain answers to these questions during the 
implementation process.   
 
The identification of federally recognized tribal reserved rights by the federal agencies should be implemented in the 
proposed rule by adding a provision that EPA will publish a database that identifies, state-by-state, which tribes and 
rights (i.e., the nature and scope of any aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources reserved by each tribe) are covered, 
the affected waterbodies or water segments and the boundaries of any impacted adjacent lands, and clarify the rule’s 
applicability to waterbodies or water segments within and without trust lands and reservations. Also, the rule should 
commit EPA to periodically update the database and create a presumption that a state which bases the incorporation of 
federally recognized tribal reserved rights into its water quality standards triennial review based upon the then current 
federal database has satisfied its obligation to consider changes to those rights since the prior triennial review. 
Implementing this recommendation would require appropriate modifications to 40 CFR 131.6(g)(1), 40 CFR 131.9(b) and 
40 CFR 131.20(a). Barring this, EPA should detail how they intend to assist states with addressing the concerns 
addressed above with identifying tribal reserved rights.  
 
EPA proposes adding a new definition to 40 CFR 131.3 defining “tribal reserved rights” as “any rights to aquatic and/or 
aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, 
executive orders, or other sources of Federal law” but does not define the scope of these rights or provide information 
on how EPA plans to assist states in defining this scope. For example, the term implicitly is subject to interpretation. EPA 
should provide specific examples or activities or resources that have been implicitly determined to be tribal reserved 
rights. To avoid disagreements and disputes over the nature of tribally held rights, the rule should also be limited to 
expressly reserved rights only, as opposed to other kinds of rights. 
 
The proposed rule would require “The exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of 
the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource” but does not define the extent of these unsuppressed rights or how states 
are to determine these unsuppressed rights. On the one hand, the proposed rule at §131.9 would require states “to 
protect: (1) The exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-
dependent resource,” but on the other hand, the preamble suggests that other factors should be considered in 
determining unsuppressed rights. For example, citing the National Environmental Justice Advisory Committee’s 2002 
report, EPA states that “the unsuppressed level of a resource … will depend on the factors affecting water quality and 
availability of the resources[,]” and that “it may be appropriate to take into consideration both heritage rates of use … 
and factors that have substantially altered the pollutant burden, hydrology, or availability of the resource, such that use 
of the resource at heritage rates is not feasible” Preamble, IV.C.2.ii. Accounting for Suppression Effects. These appear to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
–4– 
be inconsistent. The proposed rule should include a definition of unsuppressed rights addressing these issues, 
supplemented by written guidance, as appropriate.  
 
The preamble also suggests that unsuppressed rights may vary over time. For example, “the unsuppressed level or use 
of a resource should account for situations where restoration efforts are planned or underway (e.g., efforts to improve 
habitat or reduce contamination), such that it would be reasonable to expect the opportunities for use of the resource 
to increase in the future. In these situations, where supported by available data and information, EPA is proposing to 
require that water quality standards must be set at levels that reflect unsuppressed exercise of the reserved right” 
Preamble, IV.C.2.ii. Accounting for Suppression Effects. EPA should address the implication that if no such restoration 
project is underway, the water quality standards need not reflect unsuppressed exercise of the reserved right which 
appears to contradict the proposed standard set forth in §131.9, quoted above.  
 
EPA guidance cited in the proposal explains that the heritage rate of consumption “is generally extrapolated or 
reconstructed from information available in anthropological or historical literature” and that “[i]n many cases, heritage 
rates may be the only practical way to estimate unsuppressed rates[.]” The proposal explains that the unsuppressed 
analysis “should balance heritage use of a resource with what is currently reasonably achievable for a particular 
waterbody,” but also states that it should consider plans for future restoration activities that could improve current 
conditions. The proposal explains that, in the case of a difference of opinion about the required level of water quality 
necessary to protect a reserved right, “EPA will take action based on the best available information in the same way 
that EPA currently makes [water quality standards] decisions in these circumstances in other contexts, e.g., determining 
whether criteria are scientifically defensible in situations where there is conflicting science, there are gaps in the 
science, and/or there are different conclusions among stakeholders.”   
 
Based on experience, states are concerned that there will be disagreements among states and stakeholders about what 
may be “reasonable” and “achievable currently and in the future.”  States foresee a high likelihood of disputes arising 
given the current requirements for scientific rigor in the water quality standards program, the potential for new 
standards to be developed under this proposal based on reconstructed or extrapolated historical information, and EPA’s 
perceived role as the mediator of such disputes between states and tribes.4 States request that EPA clarify the criteria 
for the states’ decision-making to minimize such disputes. States are unable to accurately assess the impacts of this rule 
without information on these scoping questions and how EPA will support states in determining this scope.   
 
 
 
4 EPA states, “Courts generally adhere to several guiding principles in interpreting treaties and other Federal legal instruments regarding 
Indians tribes known as the ‘‘Indian canons of construction.’’ 87 F.R. 74363.  In accordance with these canons, EPA asserts ‘‘Indian treaties 
are to be interpreted liberally in favor of the Indians, and any ambiguities are to be resolved in their favor.’’ (Citations omitted).  87 F.R. 
74363.  However, in most instances, the state and federal courts have not found the Indian Law Canons to be applicable or determinative 
when deciding legal disputes between the states and tribes about the meaning of settlement language. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
–5– 
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide these comments and extend our gratitude for a robust coregulator 
commitment from EPA that will follow and allow NEIWPCC member states’ agencies to provide input throughout the 
remainder of this rulemaking process. NEIWPPC does not seek to supplant or replace those comments that its member 
states submit on their own behalf. Please do not hesitate to contact me or Courtney Botelho (cbotelho@neiwpcc.org or 
978-349-2344) of my staff if you have any questions or concerns.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Susan J. Sullivan 
Executive Director 
 
CC:  NEIWPCC Executive Committee and Commissioners 
NEIWPCC Water Quality Standards Work Group

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0181 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
The Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation 
Colville Business Council 
(509) 634-2200 
P.O. Box 150, Nespelem, WA 99155 
FAX: (509) 634-4116 
2/27/2023 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
The Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation ("Colville Tribes") provides the following 
comments and attached revisions to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's Docket ID No. EPA-
HQ-OW-2021-0791, Proposed Revisions to the Federal Water Quality Standards Regulation to Protect 
Tribal Reserved Rights (Draft Policy). 
The Colville Tribes' response focuses primarily on the demotion of preference of protections and 
consultation requirements with those tribes without treaties. It is disheartening that an agency such as the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), takes a position in which gives preferential treatment to 
Tribes with ratified treaties to the detriment of Tribes defined by other trust relationships. The Colville 
Tribes appreciates the ongoing working relationship it has with EPA and respectfully requests that it 
consider the following comments and proposed amendments in order to comply with Executive Order 
13175. 
The Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation consists of twelve tribes whose homelands 
cover much of Eastern Washington. The Colville Tribes have federally recognized and protected rights 
throughout eastern Washington. These rights are protected by statute, agreement, and executive order. 
Pursuant to federal law, these types of rights are exactly the same and to be treated in the same manner as 
rights protected by a treaty. This has been affirmed by the federal courts. 
The proposed revisions continually refer to tribal rights as "Reserved Rights". This term is being 
used in error as reserved rights specifically refer to those rights established through treaty negotiations. 
Reserved rights are not the only federally protected tribal rights. The Colville Tribes have federally 
protected rights based on federal statute, federal executive order, and other federal agreements. While the 
proposed revisions to the Federal Water Quality Standards Regulations make strides towards recognizing 
inherent tribal interests and rights, the language in the proposed document continually gives the 
impression that Tribal Treaty and Reserved Rights are the primary focus to the exclusion of all other 
established tribal rights. The Colville Tribes has affirmed and federally protected rights in its traditional 
territories outside of the Reservation. The Courts have established that there is no difference in rights, 
regardless whether they are held by treaty, statute, executive order, or other legal agreement. 
Additionally, the Colville Tribes is recognized to have cultural interests and ties throughout eastern 
Washington (burial grounds, sacred sites, etc), that have been recognized by federal and state entities. 
The proposed document fails to give equal footing to any of these protected rights or areas, instead 
focusing on those reserved rights derived from a treaty. We request that in the place of language such as, 
Tribal treaty, reserved and similar rights, and the term Protected Tribal Rights be used. We also request 
that instead of using "ceded territories" the language used should be traditional territories. 
Colville Tribes Response to Draft Policy 
1 

chael-
, Colville Business Council 
The Colville Tribes request that any Government to Government consultation with the EPA be 
conducted in the following manner: 
•
Initial consultation requests should be sent to Tribal Chairperson. 
•
Consultation needs to be established early in the decision making process and should be 
conducted regularly. 
•
Official Government to Government Consultation may only occur with the Colville Tribes' 
governing body, the Colville Tribal Business Council. Unofficial consultation, or 
collaboration/information sharing, may occur at the tribal program level. 
Thank you in advance for taking the Colville Tribes' concerns seriously. The Colville Tribes 
looks forward to continued consultations with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency on these 
important matters. 
Sincerely, 
Colville Tribes Response to Draft Policy 
2

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0244 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
190 Sail Star Drive NW, Cass Lake, MN 56633 
 
 
 
Via Email: Brundage.jennifer@epa.gov  
 
 
 
 
       
Jennifer Brundage US Environmental Protection Agency 
William Jefferson Clinton Building 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
March 6, 2023 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
 
RE: EPA proposed rule: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal 
Reserved Rights 
 
 
The Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe holds usufructuary rights to hunt, gather, and fish within 
territories ceded in the 1855 Treaty with the Chippewa. Located outside of the current day Leech 
Lake Reservation, many of these waters continue to hold great importance to the Leech Lake 
Band. The Band strongly supports the protection of Tribal Reserved Rights and treaty resources 
and requiring the use of unsuppressed rates of use/consumption for determining water quality 
standards. However, we recommend improvements to the antidegradation standards Option #1. 
Tribes hold a spiritual connection to these lands and waters as well as traditional ecological 
knowledge regarding the natural resources found in their homelands. States have repeatedly 
failed to acknowledge or include input from the Tribes in these decisions, and Tribes must have a 
stronger role in designation of outstanding natural resource waters that protect treaty rights. 
 
Treaty Wild Rice and Antidegradation 
 
The Leech Lake Reservation and the surrounding area are blessed with lakes where Manoomin 
(wild rice) grows. Wild rice is sacred and every fall during the Rice Moon our people gather rice 
both on the Reservation and on lakes in the 1855 Ceded Territory. Wild rice drives our economy 
and provides food security. Anishinaabeg exist because of wild rice, and we have a covenant 
with the Creator to protect it.  
  
The Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe Division of Resource Management purchases unfinished rice 
from our Band members for finishing and resale.  This venture is a business operation, a source 
of income for Tribal harvesters, and a cultural and subsistence food store.  In short, an important 
component of food sovereignty.  The Tribe’s right to harvest wild rice both on and off-
Reservation is protected by Treaties with the United States government. 
 
LEECH LAKE BAND OF OJIBWE 
DIVISION OF RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 

  
 
190 Sail Star Drive NW, Cass Lake, MN 56633 
 
Off-Reservation wild rice lakes have become increasingly important due to climate change and 
drought. If the water levels are too low, the plants may grow, however the beds can be 
inaccessible due to low water levels even by traditional canoe harvesting.  As an example, 
Blackwater Lake immediately to the east of our Reservation is particularly important in low 
water years, like 2021, due to the consistent water levels provided by the Pokegama Dam, 
operated by the Army Corps of Engineers.  
 
Blackwater Lake is an important treaty resource with over 300 acres of wild rice.  Blackwater is 
designated a “Lake of Outstanding Biological Significance” by the MN Department of Natural 
Resources through the Minnesota Biological Survey.1 Blackwater Lake is designated for priority 
protection by the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency under the Mississippi River Headwaters 
Watershed Restoration and Protection Strategy Report.2 Blackwater is also on the DNR List of 
350 Most Important Rice Waters in Minnesota.3   
 
However, Blackwater is not considered an outstanding natural resource water (ONRW) by the 
State of Minnesota. Because of this, the Blackwater wild rice beds, like many others, are 
threatened by development.  For decades the Blackwater has been protected by the large wetland 
buffer upstream from the Boswell coal electrical generating unit.  However, as the Boswell EGU 
anticipates decommissioning, it is seeking to sell off the wetland buffer to industrial 
development. 
 
Impacts of Hydrology and Development 
 
Historically, wild rice was pervasive along this region of the Mississippi River but has since 
declined from the impacts of development, loss of wetlands, and most recently the droughts 
potentially caused by climate change.  The Minnesota Department of Natural Resources has 
documented that hydrological changes and development are the most significant threat to wild 
rice beds.4  
 
Wild rice is a shallow water plant and is sensitive to changes in water levels. Even when the 
water level of a lake remains generally steady, heavy precipitation causes abrupt changes in 
water level that uproot aquatic plants. Natural wild rice is particularly susceptible to uprooting 
during its floating-leaf stage, which occurs in early summer, which is also the time of the largest 
rainfall events in northern Minnesota. Due to the natural buoyancy of the plant, it is at this stage 
of growth that wild rice is most susceptible to uprooting by rapidly rising water levels. Plants can 
be significantly stressed even when they remain rooted. Shoreline development and the removal 
of wetlands eliminates the ability of these areas to retain and absorb stormwater, leading to 
intense stormwater runoff events that raise water levels and uproot wild rice. 
 
                                                 
1 Data source is the DNR Minnesota Biological Survey website. https://gisdata.mn.gov/dataset/env-lakes-of-
biological-signific. See also, https://files.dnr.state.mn.us/eco/sli/blackwaterjaygould_31056100.pdf  
2 https://www.pca.state.mn.us/sites/default/files/wq-ws4-50a.pdf  
3 https://www.eqb.state.mn.us/sites/default/files/documents/DNR%20350%20waters%20list_20181231.pdf  
4 https://files.dnr.state.mn.us/fish_wildlife/wildlife/wildrice/natural-wild-rice-in-minnesota.pdf 

  
 
190 Sail Star Drive NW, Cass Lake, MN 56633 
 
Changes in upstream watersheds reduce the productivity of natural wild rice stands.  Drainage 
ditches and channelization increase the quantity and speed of water moving downstream. The 
resulting peaks in water levels produce abrupt “bounces” or rapid increases in water depth. 
Increased sedimentation caused by drainage and channelization will also bury seeds and reduce 
germination. Wild rice requires high transparency waters to thrive.5   Our projection is that 
development on the shores of Blackwater Lake, with the combination of impervious surfaces and 
stormwater sedimentation impacts, would have the significant negative effects on wild rice beds, 
as they have historically throughout Minnesota’s developed lakes and rivers. 
 
Strengthening Antidegradation Option #1  
 
Our experience in working to protect the Blackwater wild rice beds is that Option #2 will not be 
effective in protecting treaty wild rice.  When faced with the politics of a large economic 
development project, the Minnesota Pollution Control Agency (MPCA) will not consider 
designated uses, alternatives, or treaty rights, in making a 401 certification. Instead, the MPCA 
will start its analysis by finding that allowing lower water quality is necessary to accommodate 
economic development under §131.12(a)(2) so long as the developer incorporates “best 
management practices” for stormwater treatment and purchases credits from a wetland bank.  
Unless high quality waters are protected by designation as a Tier 3 ONRW, they are unlikely to 
receive protection from state agencies.  
 
For this reason, Option #1 will be more protective of treaty wild rice.  However, relying on states 
to designate high quality waters for antidegradation requirements is insufficient.  Like most 
states, Minnesota’s ONRW designations are outdated and inadequate with decades of reluctance 
and neglect.6  This state process will be difficult to change and continue to leave out this 
important consideration unless greater weight is given to treaty rights. 
 
Instead, the final rule should recognize that where high quality waters protect Tribal reserved 
rights, they constitute an ONRW.  This could be accomplished in the same manner as 
§131.12(a)(3) which recognizes “waters of national and state parks and wildlife refuges and 
waters of exceptional recreational or ecological significance.”  Treaty protected waters should be 
in this same category, at a minimum. 
 
This is a specific way to strengthen the antidegradation provisions.  The proposed §131.9(c)(3) 
states: “Use applicable antidegradation requirements consistent with §131.12 to maintain and 
protect water quality that protects Tribal reserved rights.”  We recommend adding to that: 
“Where high quality waters protect Tribal reserved rights, they shall constitute an outstanding 
national resource, and water quality shall be maintained and protected." 
 
The concept is to cross-reference high quality treaty protected waters as Tier 3 ONRW's under 
                                                 
5 See, A. Myrbo, Sulfide Generated by Sulfate Reduction is a Primary Controller of the Occurrence of Wild Rice 
(Zizania palustris) in Shallow Aquatic Ecosystems, 22 September 2017 https://doi.org/10.1002/2017JG003787. 
6 For general discussion of state ONRW designations, see Zellmer, Sandra and Glicksman, Robert, "Using the Public 
Natural Resource Management Laws to Improve Water Pollution Anti-Degradation Policies" (2012). College of Law, 
Faculty Publications. 115. https://digitalcommons.unl.edu/lawfacpub/115 

  
 
190 Sail Star Drive NW, Cass Lake, MN 56633 
 
131.12.  Tribes would still have to nominate, but the additional language would recognize that 
these waters are in a similar category as National Parks or federal wildlife refuges, i.e. very 
strong qualification as Tier 3 ONRW's. 
 
 
 
In addition, a process should be instituted by which Tribes can directly nominate to the EPA 
high-quality waters in areas where they hold usufructuary rights to be designated as ONRWs. 
The process as envisioned in the proposed rule would require Tribes to participate in the states’ 
triennial reviews of water quality standards, put forward nominations to a reluctant state 
bureaucracy, and then follow that triennial review to the EPA’s oversight process. This would 
place a great burden on Tribal natural resource and environmental departments, and risk that 
Tribal nominations of ONRW’s will be lost in the shuffle.  Instead, the EPA’s regional offices 
should seek out nominations from the Tribes and work collaboratively with both Tribes and 
states to ensure that Tribal nominations for ONRW’s are given full consideration. 
 
The Leech Lake Band recommends that in all cases when decisions are made regarding high-
quality water determination, ONRW designation, or anti-degradation decisions, Tribes should be 
consulted and have the opportunity to nominate waters as high-quality or Outstanding Natural 
Resources. 
 
Climate Change, Wild Rice, and Treaty Rights 
 
On November 15, 2021 during the White House Tribal Nations Summit, President Biden 
announced that seventeen federal agencies, including EPA, have formally committed to 
protecting Tribal treaty rights in the Memorandum of Understanding Regarding Interagency 
Coordination and Collaboration for the Protection of Tribal Treaty and Reserved Rights. The 
MOU recognizes that federal agencies “need to consider and account for the effects of their 
actions on the habitats that support treaty-protected rights, including how those habitats will be 
impacted by climate change.” Federal agencies have a responsibility to anticipate the future 
impacts of climate change and incorporate climate adaptation planning into programs, policies, 
rules and operations.   
 
The protection of high quality wild rice waters falls squarely under this provision of the MOU.  
Climate change exacerbates droughts by making them more frequent, longer, and more severe. 
We need our federal partners to help mitigate drought impacts now and into the future by 
protecting existing treaty wild rice. 
 
Treaty Rights and Fish Consumption 
 
As mentioned above, the Leech Lake Band strongly supports requiring the use of unsuppressed 
rates of use/consumption for determining water quality standards. When determining 
unsuppressed rates of consumption, consideration should be given to the operation of dams and 
altered hydrological regimes and the influence such operations have on the growth of wild rice 
and reproduction of fish and mussels. In addition to Tribal Reserved Rights to fish, gather 
aquatic plants, and hunt for aquatic-dependent animals, EPA should also consider ceremonial 

  
 
190 Sail Star Drive NW, Cass Lake, MN 56633 
 
uses. The Leech Lake Band agrees with the use of information sources described for determining 
historic consumption/use rates and would also include reference to Tribal Resolutions regarding 
Tribal fish consumption rates. When conflicts arise between tribes and states regarding the level 
of water quality necessary for protecting Tribal Reserved Rights, EPA should take into 
consideration Traditional Ecological Knowledge/Indigenous Knowledge in addition to other 
resources. 
 
In conclusion, this proposed rule will strengthen the opportunities for members of the Leech 
Lake Band of Ojibwe to continue exercising Tribal Reserved Rights on treaty ceded lands, while 
protecting health, particularly if protected waters are designated as outstanding natural resource 
waters.   
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on Water Quality Standards for the protection of 
Tribal Reserved Rights.  We welcome further discussion and engagement on this important 
matter.  Please do not hesitate to contact my staff to continue the conversation and truly import 
change to protect our natural and treaty resources. 
 
 
Regards, 
  
 
Brandy Toft 
Interim Environmental Director 
Environmental Department 
 
 
Water Resources Program Staff 
 
Jeff Harper || Water Program Manager || 218-252-2805 || jeff.harper@llojibwe.net || 
Jakob Sorensen || Water Resource Technician || 763-516-0266 || jakob.sorensen@llojibwe.net || 
Eric Krumm || Water Resources-Environmental Analyst || 507-450-0879 || eric.krumm@llojibwe.net || 
Craig Tangren || Non Point Source Coordinator || 763-592-9026 || craig.tangren@llojibwe.net ||

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0309 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
NEWSLETTERS 

Puniw (It 1s Winter) 
December 2000 
(Issue 1 Volume 2) 
Brenda Commander - Tribal Chief 
S 11san Yo11n,g - Edi/Qr 
This ncwsleuer is printed on O 
Rec)cled chlorine free paper 
Inside this issue: 
Mercury in the Fish? ...... I 
How the Fly Saved the River 
............................... . 2 
Maliseet Language ......... 2 
Ice Fishing Tips .............. 2 
Savory Venison Stew ..... 3 
Word Search Puzzle ...... 3 
Bits and Pieces .......... 4 
Telephone Listing 
(207) 532-4273 
1-800-564-8524 (ME) 
1-800-545-8524 
• Christel Haley - ext 215 
• Dave Joseph - ext 215 
• Scott Krzanlk - ext 212 
• David Lombard - ext 220 
• Tony Tomah - ext 221 
• Sharri Venno - ext 215 
HBMI Natural Resources Department 
Mercury in the Fish? 
By Scott Krzanik, Water Resoun-es Specialist 
Jn August, 2000, the Maine Bureau of Health released The Year 2000 Freshwater 
Fish Consumption AdPisoriu percaining co mercury in the fish we ear. This advisory con-
tains important informatio n that affects ANYBODY who eats fish. Mercury can 
remain in the human body for many weeks and up to 2 years in larger fish. It will eventu-
ally be e:\.-pelled from the body through wasce, however, it is imporcant co reduce your ex-
posure co mercury by limiting the consumption of certain fish species as specified in the 
Fish Consumption Advisories. You may ask, "How does mercury find its way into the 
fish we eat?" Lets look at where mercury commonly originates and then follow its path 
through the environment and on its way to humans . 
Mercury occuts nacur.tlly in soil and ceroun rock formations, such as shale. Ir is 
also found in products we use every day such as thermometers, certain batteries, fluores-
cent light bulbs, medical instruments, laboratory equipment, and many electronic devices. 
\'Vhen we throw these produces away, many of 
them end up in municipal incineracors. 
As it bums, this 
mercury vaporizes and enters che atmosphere. When it 
rains or snows, the mercwy is brought back to the earth. 
Naturally occurring mercury leaches out of che soil and 
rock through natural processes and ends up in ground 
and/ or surface water. It also can vaporize when exposed to 
the air and be re-deposited with falling rain or snow. Re-
gardless of the source, mercury in rivers, lakes, and bottom 
sediment is transformed by aquatic organisms into methyl 
mercury, which is highly toxic. Methyl mercury is taken up 
by aquatic life forms such as plankton and fish. As methyl mercury is consumed and 
moves up the food chain through larger and larger organisms, it accumulates in corre-
spondingly higher quantities in the body cissue of fish, for example. When we eat too 
much mercury-contaminated fish, health problems can occur such as numbness, weak-
ness, fatigue, poor coordination, depression, tremors, and irricabilicy. In some cases, eat-
ing excessive amounts of mercury-contaminated fish can lead to birth defects, blindness, 
paralysis, and even death. 
For more information, contact the Bureau of Health, Environmental Toxicology 
Program at 207-287-6455, or visit the website: 
http: //janus.state.me.us /dhs /boheq;> /2KFCA.pdf 
R emember, fish is good for you, just be aware of the advisory. For more informa-
tion on fish or other dietary concerns contact Sue Tortello, HB:MI N utritionist at (207) 
532-2240 exc. 26 

Page2 
Skitke m iq Nuta comit 
How the Fly Saved the River 
An Anishnabeg story 
Many, many years ago when the world was 
new, there was a beautiful river. Fish in 
great numbers lived in this river, and its 
water was so pure and sweet that all the 
animals came there to drink. 
A giant moose heard about the river and he 
too came there to 
drink. But he was 
so big, and he 
drank so much, 
that soon the water 
began to sink 
lower and lower. 
The beavers were 
worried. The water around their lodges was 
disappearing. Soon their homes would be 
destroyed. 
The muskrats were worried, too. What 
would they do if the water vanished? How 
could they live? 
The fish were very worried. The other ani-
mals could live on land if the water dried 
up, but they couldn't. 
Ice Fishing Tips By Dave Joseph 
The ice fishing season will be starting again \'ery 
shortly. Before you set your traps, I would like to re-
mind you of a few things that can make your ice fish-
ing experience safe and more enjoyable. 
• 
Be sure to read the State Ice Fishing regulations 
for the waters that you plan to fish. As the wise 
Judge always says "there is no excuse for igno-
rance of the law." If any o f the regulations are 
confusing be sure to consult with a game warden, 
never j11sl asmme what it means. 
• 
Always dress in layers. Ir is much easier to take 
clothes off and stay warm than to not have 
enough to keep you warm. Cottons are the worst! 
Wear synthetics or wool clothing. 
All the animals tried to think of a way to 
drive the moose from the river, but he was so 
big that they were too afraid to try. Even the 
bear was afraid of him. 
At last the fly said he would try to drive the 
moose away. All the animals laughed and 
jeered. How could a tiny fly frighten a giant 
moose? The fly said nothing, but that day, as 
soon as the moose appeared, he went into ac-
tion. 
He landed on the moose's foreleg and bit 
sharply. The moose stamped his foot harder, 
and each time he stamped, the ground sank 
and the water rushed in to fill it up. Then the 
fly jumped about all over the moose, biting 
and biting and biting until the moose was in a 
frenzy. He dashed madly about the banks of 
the river, shaking his head, stamping his feet, 
snorting and blowing, but he couldn't get rid 
of that pesky fly. At last the moose fled from 
the river, and didn't come back. 
The fly was very proud of his achievement, 
and boasted to the other animals, "Even the 
small can fight the strong if they use 
their brains to think." 
• 
Check the weather forecast before heading out to 
ice fish for the day. As we all know the weather 
can tum on us at anytime during the day. Pack 
plenty food and fluids. Your body will need the 
energy to help you stay warm. 
• 
Always let someone know where you plan to 
fish. 
• 
Remember to get your 2001 fishing/ combination 
license. This sometimes gets overlooked with a 
new year just starting. 
• 
Always remember to heed fish consumption lim-
its (see related mercury article). Just because it's 
winter doesn't mean the fish don't have mercury 
in them. 
Keep the fishing Jines tight and ..:t 
watch for the flags to fly up! 
--~ 
I 

Savory Venison Stelv 
Servings 6-8 
Classification - Contemporary 
Skitkemiq Nutacomit 
Page 3 
Nation/ Tribe - Northeast Woodland Region 
Ingredients 
1 /2 cup com oil 
1 medium onion coarsely chopped 
8 small red potatoes, quartered 
3 carrots, cut into 1 /2" rounds 
1 I 4 rsp. dried, crumbled sage 
1/4 tsp coarse salt 
1/4 tsp hot sauce (tobasco) 
1 8 oz. jar salsa (mild or to caste) 
Directions 
1-1 /2 pounds trimmed venison, cubed 
3 large cloves garlic, finely diced 
3 celery stalks, diced 
2 bay leaves 
1/4 tsp. dried parsley, chopped 
ground pepper to taste 
2 cups water, vegetable or meat stock 
1 cup wild mushrooms, cut into bite size pieces 
In a large cast iron skillet or pot, heat oil over medium-high heat Add venison and quickly brown on 
all sides, scu:nng frequently. Add oruon, garl.tc and potatoes, stu:nng well. Add rematrung mgredienrs, 
blending and stirring well. Cook and cover for 30 minuces or unril the venison and potatoes are tender. 
Balance the seasoning according to taste. If stew ends up too spicy, serve with sour cream. 
This recipe and other Native American Recipes can be found on line at 
WlVW. wisdomkeepers.org/nativeway 
Word Search 
Bits & Pieces 
p 
R 
H 
A 
T 
R 
K 
T 
T 
0 
F 
p 
I 
c 
• 
We'd like to issue a warm welcome to 
R c 
0 
L 
D w J 
0 
D s 
L 
E 
E 
T 
M I 
T 
T 
E 
N s 
p s w u v 
D 
G 
DaYid Lombard who has just joined 
0 
I 
c 
I 
c 
L 
E s c 
A 
0 
K 
Q 
0 
us as our Environmental/Forestry 
0 s 
H c 
R 
K 
G 
H z 
T 
R 
F 
G 
I 
Specialist. 
s s 
0 
I 
s 
N 
0 w s 
T 
0 
R 
M c 
E 
T c 
A c s 
K 
D s 
M 
F 
0 
J 
E 
Watch the sky for a partial eclipse of 
s w 0 
0 
E 
L 
0 
H 
N 
N 
F s 
y 
F 
• 
T 
H 
L 
T 
0 
0 
L 
L 
E 
p 
L 
T 
K 
I 
the sun beginning at 11 :00 a.m. on 
K 
F 
A 
F w I 
N 
T 
E 
R 
A w M s 
Chrisrmas Day. This eclipse will be 
A 
K 
T 
B 
G s w E z u 
p 
A 
N 
H 
visible in all of North America except 
s 
L 
E 
D 
D 
I 
N 
G 
I 
s 
D 
R 
A 
I 
Alaska and should last about 3 hours 
w E s w H 
A 
G s 
N 
0 
w M 
A 
N 
I 
0 
T 
N 
L u s 
I 
G 
A w y 
D 
G 
• Shooting Stars in D~~~mber 
cold 
Icicles 
Sneezing 
Geminid meteor shower 
Flu 
Mittens 
snowman 
12/14/ 00. T .ook to the NE at 
Frost 
Moose 
snowstorm 
Hat 
skates 
warm 
2:00 am for the peak of approx 65 
Hot chocolate 
sledding 
Winter 
per hour. 
Ice fishing 
sleet 
wood stove 
Ursid meteor shower 12/22/00 
OOPS! 
Look to rhe North at 5:00 am for 
Sorry about the mix up on last month's puzzle. 
peak of approx 12 per hour. 
Thanks for the feedback. 

MALISEET VOCABULARY 
PSAN - f 1 is s11owing 
PQOMISOK - Hail 
NIPAYIMIYAN - Cb1iJt111as 
PILIKOTON - New Year 
PSANISIYE - Ught SI/OW fall 
SPAQAHTE -The snow is deep 
PSQOPEHSAN - Snow mtxed wllh ram 
WISOKITKEYU - It is bitter!J cold 
P ASOCU - The ice is frozen thick 
PIPUWOCU - The ice is Jrozpr thin 
WATSTAPSKONUT - Snowball 
Remember 
Don't Drink and Drive 
this Holiday Sea.i;nn 
HBMI Natural Resources 
Department 
11011/1011 Band of Alalisttl Indians 
R # J Box450 
Hou/1011, ME 04730 
Phont: 207-532.../273 
Fax: 207-JJ2-2660 
Winter 
is a good time to have your 
house checked for Rildon 
Contact us for your 
rc:M J..ir today/ 

We are pleased to announce that the 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians; 
Sharri Venno, HBMI Environ-
mental Planner and Sue Young, 
Administrative Assistant to the 
Natural Resources Department 
were each honored  for their     
efforts during fiscal year 2000. 
Twenty years ago the United States 
Department of Agriculture,   
Natural Resource Conserva-
tion Service (NRCS) began a    
program to honor individuals 
and organizations for 
“volunteer service in support 
of soil and water conservation  
efforts”.   
  
Skitkemiq Nutacomit 
The New England Tribal Environ-
mental Conference, hosted by the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe was held at the 
Samoset Resort in Rockland,  Maine 
April 15-18, 2001. 
 
This event, brought a number of  
New England tribes together to ad-
dress the connection between tribal 
culture and the environment. 
 
Dave Joseph and Scott Krzanik of the 
Water Resources Department, put up 
a display to share the work they are 
doing here in the Meduxnekeag River 
Watershed.  Scott also did a  presenta-
tion on the water resources program.   
 
Natural Resources Department   
members  Tony Tomah, David 
Lombard and Sharri Venno also     
attended this conference, as did  Chief 
Brenda Commander, Phil Quint HIP-
Lead, and Sue Tortello,   HBMI Nutri-
tionist.   
 
 
We would also like to extend a special  
 
 
 
(continued Page 3) 
HBMI Natural Resources Department 
Nipon (It is Summer) 
June 2001 
TELEPHONE LISTING 
 (207) 532-4273 
1-800-564-8524 (ME) 
1-800-545-8524  
ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING 
Sharri Venno - ext. 215 
FORESTRY 
David  Lombard  -  ext 220 
REAL ESTATE 
Tony Tomah  - ext 221 
WATER RESOURCES 
Dave Joseph  - ext 216 
Scott Krzanik  - ext 212 
ADMIN. ASST. 
Sue Young  - ext 202 
                        Earth Speaker 
Tribal Environmental Conference 
Brenda Commander  -  Tribal Chief 
Susan Young  -  Editor 
This newsletter is printed on  
Recycled chlorine free paper    
Scott Krzanik, Water Resource Special-
ist examines a sample of aquatic insects 
with young conference participants.  
Insects are used as an indicators to 
study water quality. (HBMI photo)
NRCS Earth Team Awards Announced 
Inside this issue: 
Tribal Environmental  
Conference ......... ............1 
Earth Team Awards.........2 
Water Resources Dept.  
Begins 7th Season............2 
Maliseet Summer ............2 
Word Search Puzzle.........2 
Wildlife Success Story.....3 
Envirothon.......... ............3 
Christmas in July ............4 
National Tree...... ............4 
Summer Techs Arrive......5 
Fish Study........... ............5 
Water Saving Tips ...........6 
Word Search Answers .....6 
Environmental Practicum 5 
 

 
On June 3rd, the Water Resources Department began collecting and 
analyzing water samples from the Meduxnekeag River Watershed. There are 11 
more sampling sites this year for a total of 23. The sites are located along the 
mainstem, North Branch, South Branch, and 6 tributaries. The water is being 
analyzed for 8 parameters: dissolved oxygen, temperature, E. coli bacteria, 
conductivity, turbidity, pH, alkalinity, and total suspended solids. These are general 
indicators of water quality and will be used to document conditions and changes 
throughout the watershed over time.  
 
In the past, there has been much concern regarding low dissolved oxygen levels, high E. coli numbers, and 
extensive algae blooms along the river. During rain storms there is a lot of sediment transported from fields and 
drained into the river. The work we do is intended to focus our efforts, and those of other organizations 
concerned about the Meduxnekeag River, on locating problem areas and working together to remediate those 
problem areas. By doing this we can only improve the quality of the water for every living thing in the 
watershed. 
 
It has been a long two weeks since we started our early mornings, but everything seems to be working out well. 
We would like to invite anyone interested to join us on our sample collection trips on Tuesdays or Wednesdays 
each week. We leave the office at 4:00 a.m. and return to the lab around 7:00 a.m. If this sounds early to you – 
IT IS !!!  If you can manage to drag yourself out of bed on time and gulp enough coffee, it’s not so bad. We 
have many opportunities to see wildlife that most folks never catch a glimpse of. We love our work and want to 
share those experiences with you all. Just contact the Water Resources Department at 532-4273 ext 212 if you 
wish to join us. 
 
Skitkemiq Nutacomit 
Page 2 
Word Search 
B 
A 
G 
K 
L 
B 
M 
J 
I 
P 
V 
D 
O 
T 
O 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
L 
B 
T 
M 
O 
O 
N 
T 
S 
L 
P 
I 
Y 
U 
H 
N 
A 
N 
M 
I 
O 
G 
P 
S 
W 
R 
Q 
P 
A 
P 
F 
S 
C 
I 
O 
M 
E 
C 
L 
I 
P 
S 
E 
T 
W 
A 
K 
I 
K 
O 
S 
E 
D 
R 
T 
Q 
W 
T 
U 
 
P 
S 
E 
W 
H 
F 
I 
S 
M 
U 
D 
G 
E 
R 
A 
R 
S 
T 
E 
A 
G 
L 
E 
M 
N 
O 
A 
E 
G 
F 
U 
S 
C 
I 
W 
D 
L 
Y 
L 
O 
P 
A 
T 
I 
S 
S 
M 
O 
C 
K 
I 
Y 
A 
T 
S 
C 
V 
G 
N 
J 
U 
D 
M 
K 
I 
O 
S 
B 
E 
A 
V 
E 
R 
Z 
X 
N 
A 
P 
L 
I 
S 
E 
R 
N 
L 
F 
S 
A 
L 
Y 
O 
D 
O 
F 
G 
A 
S 
O 
L 
M 
F 
G 
S 
A 
D 
W 
F 
S 
K 
L 
Q 
E 
F 
B 
O 
C 
K 
S 
F 
A 
N 
A 
T 
F 
O 
S 
C 
O 
R 
N 
R 
D 
A 
V 
N 
Basket 
Beaver 
Black Fly 
Canoe 
Compost 
Corn 
Eagle 
Eclipse 
Geese 
Hawk 
Moon  
Salmon 
Smudge 
Sun 
Sweetgrass 
Maliseet Summer 
The Maliseet language is full of words describing 
Summer.  Here’s just a few, how many do you 
know? 
 
Pocetes - Potatoes 
Pskihqimins - Strawberry 
Saht - Blueberry 
Minsoss - Raspberry 
Eskotassok  - Cucumber 
Akolus  - Cabbage 
Sqasis  - Squash 
Skonimin  -  Seed 
Kihkan - A garden 
Sispsis - A bird 
Wososs  - A nest 
Sipuhsis - A brook 
Piyeskomon - Corn 
Wenuhcuwimin - Pea 
Sak  - Lobster 
Water Resources Dept. Begins 7th Season 
  By Scott Krzanik 
Dave Joseph measuring dissolved 
oxygen (DO) from the Lowery Br. 

Also on display were baskets of many designs  from 
many basket makers including those of HBMI tribal 
member Fred Tomah. 
 
This event was co-sponsored by the Narrangansett 
Tribe of Rhode Island, the Mashantucket Pequot 
Tribal Nation and the Mohegan Tribe, both of Con-
necticut, the Wapanoag Tribe of Gay Head in Massa-
chusetts, the Penobscot Nation, the Aroostook Band 
of MicMacs, the Houlton Band of Maliseets and the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe of Pleasant Point and Indian 
Township. 
 
Skitkemiq Nutacomit 
 
Page 3 
Tribal Environmental Conference  (cont’d) 
thank you to Joyce Tompkins who attended the con-
ference on behalf of  the HBMI elders. 
 
The elders described changes in the environment 
that they have seen throughout their lifetimes and 
called for all ages and races to join together to     
protect and restore the natural world.  Another 
theme throughout the conference was the connec-
tion between environmental health and cultural sur-
vival including traditional cultural practices such as 
moose hunting and fishing. 
Wildlife Success Story 
With the assistance of the Natural Resource Conservation Service (NRCS) the tribe has been working to reduce 
the amount of runoff from fields into the  nearby Meduxnekeag River.  A number of Nutrient Sediment Control 
Structures (NSCS or collection basins) have been constructed on tribal land. These structures collect melt water, 
rainwater (runoff)  that would normally flow directly into the river, carrying sediment and other debris along with 
it.  These structures have not only  reduced the amount of sediment introduced into the river, it has helped create 
some wildlife habitat for migrating waterfowl and shore birds. 
 
The small ponds, sometimes referred to as vernal pools provide open water for the migrating birds before the 
areas lakes and rivers open up.  This Spring, the 
vernal pools on tribal property have been host to a  
wide variety of ducks, geese and other birds.  
Wood ducks, Mallards, Black ducks, Green 
Winged Teals, Common Pintail,  American 
Wigeon, Canada Geese and Killdeer have all been 
spotted in or near the pools on the Lowery Road. 
  This white throated Canada goose was  seen many times along the  
Lowery Road 
Envirothon 2001 
On May 23, 2001 Dave Joseph, David Lombard 
and Sue Young  traveled to the University of 
Maine at Fort Kent to participate as judges in the 
Northern Maine Regional Envirothon hosted by 
the St. John Valley Soil and Water Conservation 
District. 
 
Twelve teams of students representing area high 
schools competed against one another to test their 
knowledge of their environment.  Teams were 
tested in the areas of Forestry, Wildlife, Soils, 
Aquatics and Non-Point Source   Pollution.    
 
 
 Nature 
 is not a place to visit,  
It is home  
Gary Snyder 

Christmas in July 
With warm temperatures complete with blue skies and sunshine the last thing anyone wants to think about is 
winter.  But before we know it it’ll be time to close up the house and wait for all that winter will throw at us. 
But winter means more than snow and ice.  Winter is the perfect time to test your home for Radon. 
 
Radon is a naturally occurring gas found in the soil.  It can collect inside your home to unhealthful levels, es-
pecially during the winter months when your windows and doors are kept closed.  You can’t see or smell ra-
don but prolonged exposure to this gas increases your risk of lung cancer.  You won’t know whether you 
have a radon problem unless you test! 
 
Since we began testing tribal homes for this gas in 1995, we’ve found elevated radon levels in three houses in 
the greater Houlton area.  The Environmental Protection Agency recommends taking action to reduce radon 
in your home if it is 4 pCi/L or greater.  We’ve helped one family reduce their radon levels below this level, 
one family has since moved away (NOT because of radon), and we expect to 
help our third family reduce their radon levels this year.   
 
If your home has not yet been tested contact Sharri Venno at 532-4273 ext. 
215 to arrange for testing.  Testing is really quite painless, all you do is place 
the test kit in your home as instructed, leave it alone for at least 3 months, 
bring the kit in to the office or ask us to collect it.  That’s all there is to it! 
Once your kit is collected we send it off for analysis.  If a problem is detected, 
we will work with you to reduce the radon level in your home.   
 
We have a lot of information available to anyone requesting it.  Some of the 
publications we can provide you include:   
 
 
    
 
 
Radon Facts for Tribal Communities 
 
          Home Buyers and Sellers Guide to Radon 
 
 
Reducing Radon Risks 
 
 
How to Reduce Radon Levels in Your Home 
 
            A Citizen’s Guide to Radon 
 
            Learning About Radon: a part of nature 
 
 
Remember, it’s never too late to take action against Radon. 
 
Skitkemiq Nutacomit 
Page 4 
National Arbor Day  Foundation  Announces National Tree 
The Arbor Day Foundation recently conducted a poll to find America’s favorite tree. From the  beginning, the 
oak was the most popular choice, capturing over 100,000 votes. Nearly half a million Americans voted  for 
their  favorite tree. 
 
The top 5 trees were:   Oak - Redwood  - Dogwood - Maple - Pine 
 
 
   
For more information about the selection of our new national emblem or trees in   
general contact The National Arbor Day Foundation at www.arborday.org  or  call   
(402) 474-5655  or write  - 100 Arbor Avenue, Nebraska City, NE 68410  
or contact David Lombard HBMI Forester at ext 220 
To request one of these publications or if 
you have any questions about Radon or 
Radon testing, simply write or call Sharri 
Venno at 532-4273 ext 215 and she will 
be happy to answer your questions or have 
the materials sent out to you. 

Through a project funded by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA), employees in the Natural Resources Department are collecting fish 
to  determine the presence and concentration of mercury in fish caught in 
the Meduxnekeag Watershed. 
 
This information will be used to estimate the levels of mercury contamina-
tion in fish populations within the watershed and the potential risk that 
these levels pose to humans and wildlife.  Since statistics show that Native 
American’s eat more wild caught fish than the general population, the 
study of the Meduxnekeag is especially important. 
 
HBMI employees are trained to properly collect, store and transport fish 
samples for analysis.  They are sampling fish from the main stem, North 
and South Branches of the Meduxnekeag River, the Lt. Gordon Manuel Wildlife Management area on the 
south branch, Green Pond, Meduxnekeag (Drews) Lake, Nickerson Lake, B Lake and Number 9 Lake.   
Species that may be collected for analysis include lake, brook, and brown trout; landlocked salmon, burbot, 
large and small mouth bass, chain pickerel, yellow and white perch, suckers and brown bullhead.  Catching 
the numbers and sizes of fish required for the study has proved to be 
quite a challenge.  In the case of  lake trout, the fish must measure 
between 19  -  22 inches, brown trout must measure between 15 - 18 
inches.   
 
If you’d like more information 
about the study or fish 
consumption  advisories please 
don’t hesitate to contact us at   
532-4273. 
Skitkemiq Nutacomit 
Page 5 
Summer Technicians Have Arrived 
June has arrived and that means one thing, no, not school’s out, it means our summer techs have joined us. 
 
This year the Water Resources Department is joined by Brittney London and Danielle Fitzpatrick.  They will be 
assisting Scott Krzanik and Dave Joseph with their work in the watershed.  For more information about the 
Water Resources Program, see Scott’s article on page 2. 
 
David Lombard, Environmental/Forestry Specialist is joined by Christina Desiderio and Ryan Greenlaw.  The 
Environmental/Forestry techs will be working with David to plant trees on tribal lands and in riparian buffers 
along the river.  They will also be taking part in a study to help measure mercury levels in the fish in the Medux-
nekeag River and other waters in the Meduxnekeag Watershed.  See article below for more information on this 
project. 
Mercury Study 
 Environmental Youth Practicum 
 
We’re pleased to announce  
 tribal member 
Kylie Pedersen 
has been accepted to attend the      
 national Native American Fish & 
Wildlife Society’s Environmental 
Youth Practicum held in Evergreen 
Colorado this July 
Brittney London  -  WR tech fishing the main 
stem of the Meduxnekeag 

Skitkomiq Nutacomit 
HBMI Natural Resources Department 
Toqaqiw (Autumn) 
September 2001 
Toqaqiw (Autumn) 
Inside this issue: 
                        Earth Speaker 
Issue 8  
Brenda Commander  -  Tribal Chief 
Susan Young  -  Editor 
This newsletter is printed on  
Recycled chlorine free paper    
Telephone Listing 
 (207) 532-4273 
1-800-564-8524 (ME) 
1-800-545-8524  
ENVIRONMENTAL  PLANNING 
Sharri Venno  — ext. 215 
FORESTRY 
David Lombard — ext. 220 
REAL ESTATE 
Tony Tomah  - ext. 221 
WATER RESOURCES 
Dave Joseph—ext. 216 
Scott Krzanik—ext. 212 
ADMIN. ASST. 
Sue Young—ext. 202 
Low Water in the Meduxnekeag 
 
This Summer has proved to be one of 
the driest in recent memory.  Following 
on the heels of a below normal snowfall 
this past winter, local waterways are 
showing the signs of drought conditions. 
Water levels in the Meduxnekeag River 
are very low and a number of streams 
and brooks have gone dry. 
 
In addition to low water levels, we are 
experiencing a heavy growth of algae in 
the river.  This abundance of algae is 
even visible from the air as shown in the 
aerial photo below. The algae thrives as a 
result of warmer water temperatures and 
an overabundance of phosphorous and 
other nutrients in the water.  A lot of 
these nutrients enter the watershed as  
direct runoff from streets, yards and 
farmland, in addition to being discharged 
from plants and factories along the river.   
 
Times like this help to remind us of the 
importance of water conservation and 
the need to reduce the amount of 
pollutants that enter our lakes and 
rivers.   
  
Aerial photo of HBMI administration 
building and the Meduxnekeag River.  
An overgrowth of algae shows as green 
patches along the river. 
Algae concentration just below the Lowery 
Bridge on the Meduxnekeag River. 
Algae grows in various forms.  Strands 
of algae like the one above can reach 15 
feet or more in length. 
Algae . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 
Mercury Fish Study  
Update . . . .  . . . . . . . . 2 
Water Resource  
Summer Techs . . . . . . 3 
Moose Recipe . . . . . . . 3 
Word Search . . . . . . . . 3 
The Importance of  
Wetlands . . . . . . . . . . .4 
Toqaqi Kisuhs 
(Grandmother Autumn) 
. . . . . . .  . . . . . . . . . . . .5 
Hunter Safety Tips  . .  5 
Radon Update . . . . . . .6 

Skitkomiq Nutacomit 
Toqaqiw (Autumn) 
Page 2 
Mercury Fish Study -Update 
We’re pleased to announce that thanks to 
the efforts of  summer techs, Christina 
Desiderio, Ryan Greenlaw and David 
Lombard, HBMI Environmental Special-
ist/Forester, we were able to gather a 
number of fish samples for the first phase 
of this study.  The fish that were caught, 
were rinsed, tagged, wrapped and frozen 
for delivery to the lab for analysis.  
 
Once the fish have been tested, we will 
report the results in a future edition of  
this newsletter.   
 
The Water Resources team led by Scott 
Krzanik and Dave Joseph, and summer 
techs Brittney London and Danielle Fitz-
patrick also helped out with this project. 
 
Christine Desiderio nets a small mouth 
bass at Nickerson Lake 
White Perch being 
measured 
White Perch  from Nickerson Lake 
Ryan Greenlaw with the 
“Catch of the Day” 
David 
Lombard’s 
14-1/2” 
Brook trout 
caught at #9 
Lake  
Bridgewater 
Dave Joseph  - Master Fisherman 
Fish Habitat Survey 
In July, the Natural Resources staff took part in a 
fish habitat survey led by Frank Frost, Regional 
Fisheries Biologist for the State of Maine. 
 
The teams set out to map a large segment of the  
Meduxnekeag River to identify areas which provide 
good habitat for local fish populations.  They noted 
information such as water depth, temperature, rate 
of flow, the type of river bottom (rocky or silty), 
the presence or absence of plants in and along the waters 
edge, including riparian buffers, 
streams or tributaries feeding into 
the river, pools, and current or      
potential fish spawning areas.    
 
This information is to be used to 
help determine future fish stocking 
efforts, fish habitat restoration needs and to help restore 
native fisheries. 

Skitkomiq Nutacomit 
Toqaqiw (Autumn) 
Page 3 
N 
A 
O 
R 
W 
G 
T 
M 
P 
R 
U 
I 
O 
P 
M 
U 
X 
C 
M 
S 
F 
A 
L 
H 
F 
H 
I 
A 
K 
T 
H 
L 
O 
R 
I 
P 
B 
A 
A 
R 
P 
R 
L 
U 
P 
D 
0 
R 
R 
L 
E 
R 
G 
P 
H 
T 
M 
M 
R 
R 
S 
C 
B 
E 
A 
V 
D 
Q 
U 
R 
N 
N 
G 
R 
E 
O 
E 
G 
L 
E 
O 
O 
S 
I 
B 
E 
A 
V 
E 
R 
A 
F 
O 
S 
N 
O 
W 
D 
B 
G 
W 
Q 
R 
N 
R 
J 
C 
T 
T 
S 
S 
G 
V 
N 
M 
H 
C 
X 
Z 
B 
T 
Q 
W 
U 
R 
E 
G 
P 
G 
F 
D 
D 
N 
F 
O 
N 
N 
K 
K 
L 
D 
E 
E 
R 
N 
F 
W 
J 
B 
S 
D 
F 
G 
O 
 
J 
D 
G 
N 
J 
Y 
R 
W 
E 
A 
G 
L 
O 
M 
U 
R 
F 
H 
Y 
S 
F 
T 
R 
R 
D 
F 
J 
M 
R 
E 
C 
O 
G 
N 
I 
T 
I 
O 
N 
D 
A 
Y 
Autumn 
Bear 
Beaver 
Corn 
Deer 
 
Harvest 
Maple 
Moose 
October 
 
Partridge 
Recognition Day  
Snow 
Sunset 
 
Word Search 
Water Resource Techs 
 
It’s hard to believe that our summer water techs Brittney 
London and Danielle Fitzpatrick have left us already.   
 
This year Brittney and Danielle  worked alongside Scott 
Krzanik and Dave Joseph to test and monitor the water 
quality in the  Meduxnekeag River and the surrounding 
tributaries.  Field measurements were taken to record the 
air and water temperature, dissolved oxygen levels as 
well as water depth, which became quite a challenge as 
the  water levels receded due to this summer’s drought.  
Danielle Fitzpatrick in Lab 
Brittney London preparing   
bacteria plates 
Moose Roast Recipe 
 
1– 4 lb moose roast 
     3-4 strips bacon 
 
 
 
2 tbsp chopped onions     1/4 tsp pepper 
 
1 tsp dry mustard 
     1 cup cranberry juice 
 
 
1/4 tsp. ground cloves      2-1/2 cups water  
4 tbsp brown sugar 
     3 tbsp flour  
     
 1 tsp salt 
 
     1/2 tsp cinnamon 
1 cup milk                        1/2 cup white wine vinegar 
 
Remove fat from moose 
and wipe well with clean 
cloth.   
 
Lard the roast as follows: 
 
Cut bacon into 2” strips, pierce the roast with a 
sharp knife at 2” interval and insert bacon into 
holes, place moose into glass or earthenware 
bowl. 
 
Mix the following ingredients and pour over 
roast:: 
Salt,  pepper, cinnamon, cloves,  mustard, brown 
sugar , water and vinegar.  Cover and marinate 
roast in refrigerator for 24 to 48 hours.  Turn 
roast often if marinade does not completely cover 
roast. 
 
Remove roast from marinade and place in cov-
ered roaster at 350 degrees for approx. 1 hour.  
Add onion, cranberry juice and continue cooking 
roast until tender, approx. 1 hour more. 
 
When cooked remove from pan to hot platter.  
At flour to pan drippings and cook for 5 minutes, 
add milk stirring constantly until gravy is at de-
sired thickness. 
 
From Northern Cookbook by Eleanor A. Ellis 
Once back in the lab, the water samples were tested for pH and alkalinity, turbidity, conductivity, 
e.coli, dissolved oxygen and total suspended solids. The hours were long and field work often in-
cluded battling the mosquitoes and black flies but Danielle & Brittney were great.  Brittney has taken 
the fall off from her studies at UMPI and Danielle has headed off to the University of Hawaii.  We 
miss them both and wish them all the best. 

Page 4 
Skitkomiq Nutacomit 
Toqaqiw (Autumn) 
The Importance of  Wetlands 
Less than half of the wet-
lands that once existed in the 
United States still remain to-
day.  Presently more than 300,000 acres of wet-
lands are bulldozed in the US each year. The 
subject of wetlands is a touchy one.  Some see 
wetlands as a 
haven for 
wildlife in an 
ever changing 
world, while 
others simply 
see a messy, 
swampy area 
that kills 
trees, breeds 
insects, and 
threatens 
property and 
roads.  Often 
the two sides clash. If one looks a little deeper, 
they’ll find that wetlands mean more than just  
wet land. 
 
Some of the disagreements stem simply from 
the over 50 definitions that exist concerning 
wetland use.  A Natural Research Council 
Committee offered the following definition: “A 
wetland is an ecosystem that depends on con-
stant or recurrent shallow inundation or satura-
tion at or near the surface of substrate”. That 
definition does little to help clarify what a wet-
land is and how we need to treat it.   
 
Essentially  a wetland is usually wet, it will 
probably have standing water or wet soil most 
of the year or it will support plants and soils 
that occur in wet environments.  Wetlands are 
host to approx. 5,000 species of plants, 190 
species of amphibians (frogs, toads etc.) and 
1/3 of the bird species found in the United 
States. 
 
However, most people still see wetlands as eye-
sores, puddles of ooze and 
muck causing problems 
with drainage, and in the 
case of beaver 
ponds, washing 
out roads and 
killing trees and 
vegetation. 
 
But wetlands 
are more than 
just habitat 
for birds, 
bugs, plants 
and other crit-
ters.  Many 
animals like 
the moose, beaver and muskrat rely heavily on wetlands 
for their survival.  Wetlands also help purify groundwa-
ter and stabilize shorelines. Wetland  help filter pollut-
ants thereby improving water quality.  Much of the damage 
in past years from 
the flooding of 
the  Mississippi 
River can be di-
rectly attributed to 
the systematic 
draining of wet-
lands. 
 
Here on tribal 
property, we’ve 
worked to create 
and protect wet-
lands by building 
nutrient sediment control structures and installing a beaver 
deceiver. just to mention a few.  The sediment control 
structures have helped reduce damage from storm water 
and spring runoff that previously had caused a great deal of 
damage to tribal lands and has significantly reduced the 
amount of run off entering the Meduxnekeag River.  These 
collection basins have created temporary ponds, that pro-
vide habitat for migrating ducks and geese in the early 
spring.  Meanwhile the beaver deceiver allows the beaver to 
damn up brooks and streams without causing damage to 
roads. 
 
Next time you see a wetland, please look a little deeper, you 
may be surprised at what you find.  If you’d like more infor-
mation about wetlands or what you can do to help preserve 
or restore wetlands, please feel free to contact this depart-
ment. 
Beaver pond adjacent to HBMI offices 
Migrating ducks and geese on tribal 
lands taking advantage of spring pools 
Beaver deceiver at work on tribal lands 
protecting a tribal road 

Page 5 
Skitkomiq Nutacomit 
Toqaqiw (Autumn) 
TOQAQI KISUHS 
Toqaqi kosqehsuhs kisehtag mipiyil poneqiyewiwol.  
Yuttol pili toqaqisqehsisol tiyal: “Komac koti tkeyu, nit 
olu psite keq kiskihkasik kmaqenomuniya, skoniminol 
tan te elikok kmonuwehkaniya, weci kiskihkasik apc 
likotok.  Skicinuwi ‘pisun kmokonomuniya naka kis-
pastuniya weci kisuwekasik weckuwikotok.  
Kispahsaniya nomehsuwok, pehkikicik 
ote, weci weckuwikotok wolihpultiyeq 
psite mawiw.  Tan eci apatapasihtit ko-
tunkewinuwok, psite knokka kwolelaniya 
kweyossisomuwak, kat tehpu wiyusumuwa.  
Musa keq qasahkasic tan yut keluwak, talu 
ketehp motekon, skonisol, wipitol, soqonol, 
naka wituwol.  Psitehc nit kisuwekasu 
weckuwikotok.  Psitehc wenik wolaqiwik wi-
wnopultuwok etoli wolamkolek.  Nitte kisuwehki-
yeq sqot, kuli kassuwenomuniya weci apc likotok kisa-
pemeq toqakiwi nipawset peneqehtaq mipiyil. 
 
Source: Passamaquoddy Bilingual Program 
GRANDMOTHER AUTUMN 
Grandmother Autumn, the one who makes the 
leaves fall, was teaching young autumn girl.  
Grandmother Autumn told the young girl, “It is 
going to be cold, it is time to harvest the gardens 
and to gather many seeds so that they may be 
planted for next year.  Gather traditional medi-
cines and dry them for use in the coming 
year.  Dry the fish when you clean 
them so that you may enjoy them at 
the feasts.  When the hunters have 
returned with their catch, honor the 
catch and use all of the animal not just 
the meat.  You may use the skin, bones, 
teeth, tails and whiskers.  All of it may 
be used throughout the year.  In the eve-
nings enjoy the gift of a warm fire when 
family and friends gather.  After you have en-
joyed the warmth of fire, be sure to extinguish 
the gift of fire so that you may enjoy another 
Moon of Grandmother Autumn, the one who 
makes the leaves fall”.            
Hunting Safety Tips  by Scott Krzanik, Water Resources 
 
Hunting season is upon us – FINALLY!  Bear season is well underway, and 
Grouse (Partridge), Rabbit, and Duck season began on Monday, Oct. 1.  On 
Oct. 27, we can begin hunting deer.  Some people hunt while driving around 
in their vehicles while others pursue animals through the woods on foot.  No 
matter what method you choose, remember to always be safe in your out-
door activities.  Anyone can get lost, hurt, or run out of gas in the middle of 
the woods.  It is your responsibility to handle weapons safely for your sake 
and for others. In addition, here are some safety tips to keep in mind this  
season: 
 
Location:  Tell others where you are going and what time you expect to return.  Nobody will come looking for 
you if they don’t know where you are. 
 
Food and Water:  Bring EXTRA food and water with you.  Keep these items in your vehicle.  Don’t munch on 
your extra food – bring your main meals and snacks for that purpose. 
 
Clothing:  Wear wool and synthetic clothing.  Cotton material retains moisture near your skin and will lead to 
rapid body heat loss.  THIS CAN KILL YOU!!!  Wool and synthetics are easy to come by and can be purchased 
at minimal cost from thrift stores such as the Salvation Army. Don’t forget your hunter orange! 
 
Equipment:  Replace or repair equipment you took out of your pack and used during the winter and summer.  
Don’t find out that your compass or flashlight is missing just when you need it the most. 
 
Stay Alert:  Pay attention to where you are and what you are doing.  If you are tracking an animal be sure to 
mark your trail with crepe paper or flagging tape because animals don’t stay on well-marked trails. 
 
Good luck and have a safe hunting season! 

Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians 
88 Bell Road 
Littleton,  ME 04730 
Phone: 207-532-4273 
Fax: 207-532-2660 
 
HBMI Natural Resources 
Department 
 
Word Search Answers 
N 
A 
O 
R 
W 
G 
T 
M 
P 
R 
U 
I 
O 
P 
M 
U 
X 
C 
M 
S 
F 
A 
L 
H 
F 
H 
I 
A 
K 
T 
H 
L 
O 
R 
I 
P 
B 
A 
A 
R 
P 
R 
L 
U 
P 
D 
0 
R 
R 
L 
E 
R 
G 
P 
H 
T 
M 
M 
R 
R 
S 
C 
B 
E 
A 
V 
D 
Q 
U 
R 
N 
N 
G 
R 
E 
O 
E 
G 
L 
E 
O 
O 
S 
I 
B 
E 
A 
V 
E 
R 
A 
F 
O 
S 
N 
O 
W 
D 
B 
G 
W 
Q 
R 
N 
R 
J 
C 
T 
T 
S 
S 
G 
V 
N 
M 
H 
C 
X 
Z 
B 
T 
Q 
W 
U 
R 
E 
G 
P 
G 
F 
D 
D 
N 
F 
O 
N 
N 
K 
K 
L 
D 
E 
E 
R 
N 
F 
W 
J 
B 
S 
D 
F 
G 
O 
 
J 
D 
G 
N 
J 
Y 
R 
W 
E 
A 
G 
L 
O 
M 
U 
R 
F 
H 
Y 
S 
F 
T 
R 
R 
D 
F 
J 
M 
R 
E 
C 
O 
G 
N 
I 
T 
I 
O 
N 
D 
A 
Y 
Mawi kapuwoltine 
 
Let’s stand together 
RESULTS OF RADON 
TESTING PROGRAM  
BEGUN IN 1994 
 
Of the 60 homes tested so far: 
The average radon level was:   1.6 pCi/l 
The median radon level was:   0.9 pCi/l 
The lowest radon level was:       0.2 pCi/l 
The highest radon level was:   12.7 pCi/l 
 
Households over the 4 pCi/L action level  -  5 
 
This means that 1 out of every 12 households 
tested had a high level of radon 
 
Radon is a colorless, odorless, radioactive gas that 
occurs naturally in the ground.  Unfortunately, 
sometimes it can build up to unhealthful levels. 
 
HAS YOUR HOME TESTED FOR RADON? 
 
 Contact Sharri Venno, ext. 215  
to arrange for testing  
 
 

Beginning  
July 1, 2001 
 
Our address will change to  
88 Bell Road 
Littleton, ME 04730 
Water Saving Tips 
B 
A 
G 
K 
L 
B 
M 
J 
I 
P 
V 
D 
O 
T 
O 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
L 
B 
T 
M 
O 
O 
N 
T 
S 
L 
P 
I 
Y 
U 
H 
N 
A 
N 
M 
I 
O 
G 
P 
S 
W 
R 
Q 
P 
A 
P 
F 
S 
C 
I 
O 
M 
E 
C 
L 
I 
P 
S 
E 
T 
W 
A 
K 
I 
K 
O 
S 
E 
D 
R 
T 
Q 
W 
T 
U 
 
P 
S 
E 
W 
H 
F 
I 
S 
M 
U 
D 
G 
E 
R 
A 
R 
S 
T 
E 
A 
G 
L 
E 
M 
N 
O 
A 
E 
G 
F 
U 
S 
C 
I 
W 
D 
L 
Y 
L 
O 
P 
A 
T 
I 
S 
S 
M 
O 
C 
K 
I 
Y 
A 
T 
S 
C 
V 
G 
N 
J 
U 
D 
M 
K 
I 
O 
S 
B 
E 
A 
V 
E 
R 
Z 
X 
N 
A 
P 
L 
I 
S 
E 
R 
N 
L 
F 
S 
A 
L 
Y 
O 
D 
O 
F 
G 
A 
S 
O 
L 
M 
F 
G 
S 
A 
D 
W 
F 
S 
K 
L 
Q 
E 
F 
B 
O 
C 
K 
S 
F 
A 
N 
A 
T 
F 
O 
S 
C 
O 
R 
N 
R 
D 
A 
V 
N 
Word Search Answers 
Water conservation is a good idea any time by 
doing so you can save money on your water 
and electric bills while protecting water quality. 
Now is a  good time to start conserving water 
by adopting some of the following practices. 
 
Water lawns, trees and shrubs in the early morn-
ing or early evening to avoid excess evaporation.   
Water the lawn only, watch for water on roads, 
sidewalks or driveways. 
Run dishwashers and clothes washers only   
when full. 
Take shorter showers. 
Turn the water faucet off while shaving or  
brushing your teeth. 
Make sure faucets and hoses are turned off   
completely so they don’t drip and waste  water. 
Collect rainwater to water plants & flowers. 
 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians 
88 Bell Road 
Littleton, ME 04730 
Phone: 207-532-4273 
Fax: 207-532-2660 
 
HBMI Natural Resources 
Department 

 
Telephone Numbers 
(207) 532-4273 
1-800-564-8524 (ME) 
1-800-545-8524 
 
Dave Joseph — ext 216 
 
Scott Krzanik — ext 212 
 
David Lombard—ext 220 
 
Tony Tomah — ext 221 
 
Sharri Venno — ext 215 
 
Sue Young  - ext 202 
Brenda Commander  
Tribal Chief 
 
Susan Young - Editor 
Skitkomiq Nutacomit 
HBMI Natural Resources Department 
Siqon March 2002 
A Day for Celebration . . . . . . . 1 
Language Nests . . . . . . . . . . . . 1 
Two Deadlines Quickly  
Approaching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2 
ArcView GIS Training . . . . . . . 2 
Natural  Resources 
 email directory. . . . . . . . . . . . . 
 
2 
Initial Fish Study Results. . . . . 3 
Safe Eating Guidelines . . . . . .  3 
Plant Safety Part II . . . . . . . . . . 4 
Summer Tech Positions . . . . . . 5 
Word Search Puzzle . . . . . . . . . 5 
Did You Know? . . . . . . . . . . . .  5 
Winter Visitor . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6 
Word Search Answers . . . . . . .  6 
Kci Kikuwosson Lintuwakon   
(Mother Earth Song). . . . . . . . . 
 
4 
Understanding Watersheds . . .  5 
                        Earth Speaker 
This newsletter is printed on 
100% recycled chlorine free                
paper 
On February 7, 2002 the 
Eastern Area Regional    
Director for the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs signed a 
Federal Acknowledgement 
placing  another 50 acres of 
land into trust for the 
Tribe. 
 
This prime commercial 
property, located on US 
Route 1 in Houlton, was 
purchased back in 1995 
from the Bangor Invest-
ment Company.   
 
While the Tribe has no  
formal plan in place for the 
property at this time, they 
are exploring many   
opportunities.   
Language Nests 
 
The Tribe recently hired a marketing specialist to conduct market research 
and a feasibility study for business development opportunities both on and 
off tribal land.  The information provided by the marketing research consult-
ants along with the information gathered from the recent Integrated          
Resources Management Plan (IRMP) survey will help guide future tribal land 
purchases. 
A Day for Celebration  
The Natural Resources Department has been taking part in Language Nests 
led by Language Coordinator, Imelda Perley.  At each session the group 
shares language and laughter as Imelda leads us through a little bit of history 
and a little bit of culture on our way to learning the language.   So far none of 
us are fluent speakers but we are all learning to recognize words and speech 
patterns as well as well as developing a greater respect for the Maliseet      
language and culture. 
Inside this issue: 

Skitkomiq Nutacomit 
Spring 2002  
Page 2 
If you are currently an HBMI tribal member with a 
High School Diploma or GED and have an interest in 
the environment, the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) is 
currently  accepting applications for their  
Water Resources Technician Training 
Program. Each year,  BIA offers this train-
ing to tribes across the country.  
 
If selected for the program, the tribal 
member will attend an all expense paid 
training session in  either New Mexico or 
Washington State sometime this  summer. 
 
Following successful completion of the program, the 
student will    receive a voucher good for  one year  
temporary, full time position with HBMI’s Water 
Resource Program.   
 
If this sounds like something you might be  interested 
in, please contact Scott Krzanik ext. 212 or Dave     
Joseph ext. 216 today for an  application package.  
Two Deadlines quickly approaching 
All participants must sign a pledge to remain alcohol 
and substance free during the program 
 
Application deadline is 
 Friday March 29, 2002  
 
 
The Native American Fish 
and Wildlife Society has     
announced it’s annual     
Summer Environmental 
Youth Practicum to be held 
July 7 - 12, 2002 in Swannanoa, N.. Carolina. 
 
This practicum is open to students who will be 
entering 10th, 11th or 12th grade this fall. It 
provides tribal youth the chance to meet youth 
from other tribes as well as to interact with 
professional, cultural and  spiritual people.   
 
A mailing has gone out to all tribal members 
age 15 - 18.  If this sounds like something you’d 
like to participate in and have not received the 
mailing or would like additional information, 
please contact Scott Krzanik or Sue Young at 
the numbers listed on page 1 or via email to  
ogs1@maliseets.com. 
 
Application deadline is 
 Friday March 29, 2002  
ArcView GIS Training 
In February the Natural Resources department      
underwent in-depth computer training on the use 
of ArcView GIS software. This training was led by 
Judy Colby-George of Spatial Alternatives,        
Yarmouth, Maine. 
 
GIS, which stands for Geographic Information   
Systems, is a powerful tool that can be used for 
mapping out information of all types. In conjunc-
tion with data gathered with our own GPS (Global 
Positioning Systems) equipment and other data-
bases, the department is looking to generate many 
detailed maps of tribal lands and surrounding areas.   
 
This training will enable        
department members to track  
information such as land     
usage, water quality issues, 
fish and wildlife habitat just 
to name a few of its many  
applications. 
 
Special thanks to David Lombard  
For creating the great map on page 1. 
Natural Resources 
Email directory 
Dave Joseph - Water Resources Technician 
 djoseph@maliseets.com 
Scott Krzanik - Water Resources Specialist 
  water@maliseets.com 
David Lombard - Forester / Env. Specialist 
   timber@maliseets.com 
Tony Tomah - Nat. Res. Director / Real Estate 
   realestate@maliseets.com 
Sharri Venno - Environmental planner 
   envplanner@maliseets.com 
Sue Young - Admin. Asst. / Newsletter editor 
   ogs1@maliseets.com 

The Mercury in Fish Tissue study we worked on last summer is approximately 
half over.  We sampled fish from 5 lakes and streams, including the main stem of 
the     Meduxnekeag River, Drew's Lake, Number 9 Lake, Nickerson Lake and 
the south branch impoundment of the Meduxnekeag River.  The fish species 
sampled included brook trout, white perch, smallmouth bass and pickerel.  The 
first batch of fish  samples were tested at the University of Maine at Orono En-
vironmental Chemistry Laboratory.   
 
The average fish sizes and species caught  per body of water are listed below.   
All of the fish sampled to date show some mercury in their tissues, with pickerel 
showing the highest numbers thus far.  Once the sampling is complete we will be 
reporting the results in a later edition of this newsletter. 
 
 
 
 
 
We will be completing the study this field season.  There are a number of locations we have yet to survey  
including Green Pond, B-Lake, as well as the North and South branches of the Meduxnekeag River.   
 
Water body 
 
Species 
Average 
Length (in) 
Average 
Weight (oz) 
Meduxnekeag River (main stem) 
Brook Trout 
10.82 
7.80 
Drew's Lake 
White Perch 
10.83 
9.52 
Number 9 Lake 
Brook Trout 
10.39 
6.56 
Nickerson Lake 
Smallmouth Bass 
12.58 
15.52 
South Branch Impoundment 
Pickerel 
18.39 
19.82 
South Branch Impoundment (QC) 
Pickerel 
18.19 
19.40 
Skitkomiq Nutacomit 
Spring 
Spring 2002 
Initial Mercury Fish Study Results  by David Lombard, Forester/Env. Spec. 
Maine’s Safe Eating Guidelines for Freshwater Fish 
The State of Maine has issued  a warning about eating 
freshwater fish and have issued the following safe   
eating guidelines: 
 
B Pregnant and nursing women, women who 
may get pregnant and children under age 8         
Should not eat any freshwater fish from Maine’s 
inland waters.  Except,  for brook trout and     
landlocked salmon, 1 meal per month is safe. 
 
B All other adults and children older than 8 Can 
eat  2 freshwater fish meals per month.  For brook 
trout and landlocked salmon, the limit is 1 meal per 
week. 
The state of Maine has also indicated that fish in 
some Maine waters contain high levels of PCBs, 
Dioxins or DDT in them and have issued addi-
tional consumption advisories for those waters. 
 
This additional information is included in the 
State of Maine Fishing  Regulations booklets as 
well as from their website at   
http://www.state.me.us/dhs/etp   
 
Residents in other areas are encouraged to    
contact their local  Department of Health for 
advisories in their area. 
BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0280 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa 
Resource Management Division  
 
 
1720 Big Lake Rd 
Cloquet, MN 55720 
Phone (218)878-7101 
Fax (218)878-7130 
 
Administration 
Conservation 
Enforcement 
Environmental 
Forestry 
Fisheries 
Natural Resources 
Wildlife 
 
 
 
March 3, 2023 
 
Mr. Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
 
 
 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
 
 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
 
 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Submitted via https://www.regulations.gov/ 
 
Re: 
Comments on Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, Proposed Water 
Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
The Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa appreciates this opportunity to 
again provide EPA with our comments in support of the agency’s proposed 
rulemaking intended to protect tribal reserved rights under the EPA’s Clean Water 
Act authorities. The Band is a federally recognized Indian tribe, and one of six 
member bands of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe (“MCT”).  The Band retains 
hunting, fishing, and other usufructuary rights that extend throughout the entire 
northeastern portion of the state of Minnesota under the 1854 Treaty of LaPointe 1, 
through central Minnesota into Wisconsin under the Treaty of St. Peters (1837), and 
across Wisconsin into the upper peninsula of Michigan under the Copper Treaty 
(1842). These rights have been reaffirmed by federal courts, including the US 
Supreme Court.2 Throughout these ceded territories, all signatory Bands have a 
legal interest in protecting natural resources, and all federal agencies share in the 
federal government’s trust responsibility to the Bands to maintain and protect 
those treaty resources.3  
 
Hunting, fishing, trapping and gathering remain an important source of subsistence, 
cultural and religious practices for members of the Fond du Lac Band.  Natural 
resources form the cornerstone of Chippewa traditional lifeways.  Fish, game, and 
plants like Manoomin (wild rice) are vital to meeting the needs of many Band  
                                                             
1 Treaty with the Chippewa, 1854, 10 Stat. 1109, in Charles J. Kappler, ed., Indian Affairs: Laws and Treaties, Vol. II 
(Washington: Government Printing Office, 1904) 
2 Among others, see: Lac Courte Oreilles v. Voigt, 700 F. 2d 341 (7th Cir. 1983), cert. denied 464 U.S. 805 (1983); Lac Courte 
Oreilles v. State of Wisconsin, 775 F.Supp. 321 (W.D. Wis. 1991); Fond du Lac v. Carlson, Case No. 5-92-159 (D. Minn. March 18, 
1996) (unpublished opinion); Minnesota v. Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians, 119 S.Ct. 1187 (1999); United States v. State of 
Michigan, 471 F. Supp. 192 (W.D. Mich. 1979); United States v. State of Michigan, 520 F. Supp. 207 (W.D. Mich. 1981). 
3See, e.g., Exec. Order 13175—Consultation and Coordination With Indian Tribal Governments (Nov. 6, 2000) (stating “the 
United States has recognized Indian tribes as domestic dependent nations under its protection . . . .,” there is a “trust 
relationship with Indian tribes,” and “[a]gencies shall respect Indian tribal self-government and sovereignty, honor tribal treaty 
and other rights, and strive to meet the responsibilities that arise from the unique legal relationship between the Federal 
Government and Indian tribal governments.”), available at http://ceq.hss.doe.gov/nepa/regs/eos/eo13175.html (last visited 
Feb. 1, 2010). 

2 
 
 
 
 
members for food.  But plants and animals are also relied upon to provide medicines, and 
to meet ceremonial and religious needs that define unique aspects of Chippewa culture.  
The health and welfare of tribal members who rely on these vital resources for sustenance 
and cultural practices is often disproportionately at risk because these resources exist 
within regulatory schemes that have not recognized or protected tribal reserved rights. In 
the Proposed Rule, EPA is for the first time taking significant steps to protect the aquatic 
and aquatic-dependent resources reserved to tribes by proposing revisions to the federal 
water quality standards (WQS) regulations. 
 
As we stated in previous comments, the exercise of these rights requires access to natural 
resources that are not contaminated.4  Treaty rights, environmental health, and tribal 
culture are all interconnected.  Populations with unique connections to the natural 
environment, such as Indian tribes, experience impacts that are too often overlooked.  The 
EPA recognized this in its Final Guidance for Incorporating Environmental Justice Concerns 
in EPA’s NEPA Compliance Analyses (1998): “[A]s a result of particular cultural practices, 
that population may experience disproportionately high and adverse effects.  For example, 
the construction of a new treatment plant that will discharge to a river or stream used by 
subsistence anglers may affect that portion of the population.  Also, potential effects to on-
or off-reservation tribal resources (e.g., treaty-protected resources, cultural resources 
and/or sacred sites) may disproportionately affect the local Native American community 
and implicate the federal trust responsibility to tribes.5   
 
EPA has long recognized the key role that the federal trust responsibility plays in the 
Agency’s planning and decision-making process.  Since 1984, EPA’s Policy for the 
Administration of Environmental Programs on Indian Reservations6 has declared that “EPA 
recognizes that a trust responsibility derives from the historic relationship between the 
Federal Government and Indian Tribes as expressed in certain treaties and Federal Indian 
law.”  The policy further states that “[i]n keeping with that trust responsibility, the Agency 
will endeavor to protect the environmental interests of Indian Tribes when carrying out its 
responsibilities that may affect the reservations.”  One of the guiding principles of EPA’s 
consultation policy is that “EPA recognizes the federal government’s trust responsibility, 
which derives from the historical relationship between the federal government and Indian 
tribes as expressed in certain treaties and federal Indian law.”7  
 
EPA states that “by amending EPA’s WQS regulations, rather than addressing [tribal 
reserved rights] on a case-by-case basis as state WQS are submitted for review . . ., EPA is 
proposing a uniform approach for establishment of WQS where tribal reserved rights apply 
and clearly laying out how EPA will review such WQS.”8 The Band agrees that incorporating 
                                                             
4 See Michigan v.  U.S.  EPA, 581 F.3d 524, 525 (7th Cir.  2009) (recognizing that a tribe’s “cultural and religious traditions … 
often require the use of pure natural resources derived from a clean environment.”).   
5 See Final Guidance for Incorporating Environmental Justice Concerns in EPA’s NEPA Compliance Analyses,§2.1.1 (footnote 
omitted), available at http://www3.epa.gov/environmentaljustice/resources/policy/ej_guidance_nepa_epa0498.pdf 
6 Available at http://www3.epa.gov/air/tribal/WETG/wetg2014/indian-policy_1984.pdf. 
7 EPA Policy on Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribes (2011), available at 
http://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2013-08/documents/cons-and-coord-with-indian-tribes-policy.pdf. 
8 87 Fed. Reg. at 74366. 

3 
 
 
 
 
the duty to protect tribal reserved rights into the WQS regulations is the best way to 
achieve clarity, predictability, transparency, and consistency in fulfilling this goal.  
 
The Band supports these proposed revisions. However, as we pointed out in our earlier 
comments for this rulemaking, we recommend clarifying that “…states and EPA must not 
impair tribal reserved rights when establishing, revising, evaluating, implementing, and 
enforcing WQS.  What we have experienced in the state of Minnesota has been a failure, 
for decades, to implement and enforce existing approved water quality standards that are 
intended to protect manoomin, or wild rice, a critically significant cultural and subsistence 
aquatic resource. This deficiency has extended across implementing those standards in 
NPDES permits as numeric pollutant limits, monitoring and assessing state waters for this 
beneficial use, and listing waters as impaired under Section 303(d) when they fail to meet 
WQS. Along with other tribes in the state, we are grateful that the EPA Region 5 office 
recently partially disapproved Minnesota’s 2020 impaired waters list and took over the 
listing of waters impaired for wild rice WQS. As another example, the Band has designated 
our most productive wild rice waters as “Outstanding Reservation Resource Waters”, with 
Tier 3 antidegradation protections under our federally approved WQS. We believe ensuring 
that water quality – specifically high quality waters that support tribally important 
resources – remains sufficient to protect tribal rights to harvest or otherwise access those 
resources necessitates a holistic approach to the implementation of WQS. 
 
Comments on specific provisions of the proposed rule 
 
The key element of EPA’s proposed regulatory initiative is the addition of 40 C.F.R. § 131.9 
to the WQS regulations. That section would require that WQS “protect tribal reserved 
rights applicable to the waters subject to such standards.”9 Notably, the Agency’s revisions 
to § 131.5 make it clear that EPA has the authority and is required to disapprove state WQS 
that do not satisfy this requirement, and must promulgate federal standards that do 
comply. The Band fully supports this long-overdue initiative, and offers the following 
comments and recommendations regarding these provisions and other aspects of the 
proposal to ensure full protection of tribal reserved rights. 
 
1. Section 131.3 (Definitions) 
The Band agrees with EPA’s proposed definition of “tribal reserved rights” in new 40 C.F.R. 
§ 131.3(r) as “rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by 
tribes, either expressly or implicitly, through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other 
sources of Federal law.” We suggest one minor revision: the definition should be prefaced 
with “as used in this Part” or “for purposes of this Part,” because tribal reserved rights are 
broader than aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources. Although those other resources are 
not likely affected by the Clean Water Act and WQS, the regulatory language should be 
clear and accurate.  
                                                             
9 § 131.9(a); see also § 131.5(a)(9). 

4 
 
 
 
 
2. Section 131.5 (EPA Authority) 
EPA itself highlights that this rule is an extension of the agency’s pre-existing obligation 
under the CWA to acknowledge and protect treaty resources in reviewing and approving 
WQS.10 As previously mentioned, the Band strongly supports the proposed requirement 
that WQS must protect tribal reserved rights, § 131.5(a)(9), and that EPA must disapprove 
WQS that do not meet this requirement and promulgate federal standards that do, § 
131.5(b) (emphasis added). The first requirement is the absolute cornerstone of this rule, 
and the second two requirements are clear and necessary actions the agency must take 
under its CWA authorities and trust responsibility to properly implement the rule. 
Our recent, unfortunate experience with Minnesota WQS revisions should be held up as a 
cautionary tale, and a clear example for how important EPA’s role in approving or 
disapproving WQS is. The state of Minnesota recently revised their Class 3 (Industrial 
consumption) and Class 4 (Agriculture and Wildlife) standards for a number of conventional 
pollutants, in some cases withdrawing numeric criteria and replacing them with narrative 
standards. Minnesota tribes strongly and consistently objected to this lowering of water 
quality standards, which included protections for Manoomin or wild rice, a culturally 
significant aquatic plant, and wildlife drinking water (including for traditional subsistence 
species like moose) under Class 4 standards.  
Even after government-to-government consultation with the state, submittal of extensive 
technically supported written comments, and oral testimony to an administrative law 
judge, the state adopted their revisions and submitted them to EPA for approval. At that 
point, despite formal consultation, submittal of additional scientifically-based evidence, 
and expressly communicated tribal objections, EPA approved those revised standards.  
The Band has now been forced to sue EPA.11 In the pending lawsuit, a primary claim is that, 
over tribal objections, neither the state nor the US EPA adequately evaluated or considered 
the impacts of those WQS changes on a treaty-protected uses. This is not just a clear 
example of a broken process—one that the Proposed Rule should clearly and carefully 
remedy—but an action contrary to the CWA itself. 
3. Section 131.6 (Minimum Requirements for WQS Submission) 
The Band generally supports the intent of EPA’s proposed subsection (g), but questions the 
phrasing in the first sentence: information on the scope, nature and current and past use of 
tribal rights holders is said to “aid” EPA in evaluating WQS submissions. But to actually 
incorporate that information provided by a consulting tribe or tribes should be obligatory,  
                                                             
10 87 Fed. Reg. at 74364-65 (“In exercising its CWA section 303(c) authority, EPA has an obligation to ensure that its 
actions are consistent with treaties, statutes, executive orders, and other sources of Federal law reflecting tribal reserved 
rights….Where tribes have reserved rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-dependent resources, protection of such rights falls 
within the ambit of these broad statutory directives and objectives and is consistent with EPA’s longstanding general 
approach to implementing CWA section 303(c), including through adoption and revision of its WQS regulation.”) 
11 See Compl., Grand Portage Band of Lake Superior Chippewa and Fond du Lac Band of Lake Superior Chippewa v. US EPA, et 
al., Case No. 0:22-cv-01783-JRT-LIB (D.Minn. July 14, 2022). 

5 
 
 
 
 
since it is the factual basis for determining in § 131.9 whether the WQS protect reserved 
rights. We also question the ambiguous process suggested by the phrase “as informed by 
the right holders.” The preamble says this “provide[s] a role for right holders” to participate 
in protecting reserved rights. 
 
The current relationships and levels of consultation between states and tribes varies 
considerably across the country. Even where there is expressed policy, such as through 
Executive Orders, for state agencies to consult with tribal nations on issues and actions that 
may affect them, there are often impediments to effective and meaningful consultation. 
Small tribal programs are frequently overwhelmed with the number of requests for 
consultation from federal agencies, and have relatively few resources to support the 
capacity to engage. And it bears mentioning that states simply do not have the trust 
responsibility to sovereign tribes that the federal government has, and that often results in 
either no consultation, notification late in a decision-making process, or an apparent lack of 
consideration of the tribal input provided. For this rulemaking initiative to succeed, there 
must be intentionally designed procedures. 
 
The Band suggests that EPA develop process guidance for these state/tribal interactions, 
and by all means retain the critical EPA-tribal consultation step as state WQS are revised. 
Based upon our extensive experience with providing input to state decision-making, by the 
time the state is ready to submit revised standards to EPA for approval they are heavily 
invested in selecting new criteria and their technical documentation. This puts the burden 
upon tribes to show evidence that the criteria are not adequate to protect treaty resources 
and can exacerbate conflict rather than promote respectful and meaningful state/tribal 
engagement. 
 
Some ways in which EPA could provide clarity and direction would be specifically requiring 
state submissions to define the procedures they used to identify and consult with rights 
holders, describe any substantive suggestions the rights holders made that the state 
ultimately did not adopt, and provide justification for not adopting them. Additionally, EPA 
should ensure states clearly understand and respect tribal requests for confidentiality 
around sensitive tribal information. Tribes have too often experienced degradation or 
destruction of important resources when their location or information about traditional or 
cultural use is made public. 
 
Additionally, the Band strongly recommends that where Traditional Ecological Knowledge 
(TEK) is offered, it will be incorporated as required information in defining the reserved 
right.  EPA has already established a willingness to use TEK in decision-making processes 
such as site assessment, characterization, and cleanup activities of contaminated lands, 12 
and expressly included specific suggestions for and examples of incorporating TEK into 
tribal water quality monitoring programs.13 Incorporation of TEK into §131.6 decision 
                                                             
12 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Memorandum “Considering Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) During the 
Cleanup Process (1.3.2017); (https://ww.epa.gov/tribal-lands/considering-traditional-ecological-knowledge-tek-during-
cleanup-process). 
13 Available at https://www.epa.gov/water-pollution-control-section-106-grants/clean-water-act-section-106-tribal-guidance   

6 
 
 
 
 
making must be considered as vital information for state submittals in protecting reserved 
rights. In our experience, TEK and ecological science are often compatible when integrated 
appropriately. 
 
One further tribal concern about sharing information and data with the state is that it 
could be used against a tribe in court proceedings, challenging our reserved rights. This 
scenario is particularly troubling as we consider how a state may approach defining fish 
consumption rates for tribal populations when surveys may not reveal complete or 
accurate information. EPA must acknowledge in this rulemaking that the nature and scope 
of many treaty rights have been the subject of sometimes decades-long court battles, and 
the determination of the scope, location, and manner of the exercise of the rights may be 
controversial and be met with resistance by states.  Or, a state may misinterpret the extent 
of a tribe’s exercise of their treaty harvest rights, and fundamentally, tribes do not want to 
re-adjudicate our reserved rights in court. The Band recommends that 131.6 include clear 
language that any tribally shared information or data will not be used in a manner that 
restricts or challenges their reserved rights where they apply. 
 
Finally, the proposed rule does not identify or provide any resources to assist rights holders 
in participating in state WQS revisions; EPA apparently assumes tribes will be able to 
provide any requested information in a timely manner. Although Fond du Lac has worked 
hard to develop a robust Environmental Program with an effective Office of Water 
Protection that includes delegated jurisdictional authorities under the CWA, we find often 
ourselves at the limits of our personnel and technical capacities. Incorporating the 
evaluation of tribal reserved rights into already-existing state triennial review procedures is 
likely to create complicated and time-consuming processes – and the three states wherein 
the Band holds reserved rights each have independent triennial review schedules. One 
triennial review process itself is a long and complicated process; navigating three will be 
onerous for us to participate in.  The Band has had extensive experience in WQS review, 
including our own triennial review processes, and recognize the amount of work it will take 
to participate effectively.  Taking on the additional responsibilities (legal review, data 
analysis and compilation) to fulfill requests for reserved rights information should suggest 
to EPA the pressing need for additional tribal support, perhaps through discretionary 
funding. 
 
4. Section 131.9 (Protection of Tribal Reserved Rights) 
The Band strongly supports the mandatory language of proposed subsection (a) that WQS 
“must” protect tribal reserved rights, and subsection (c) that WQS “must” designate uses 
and establish appropriate water quality criteria to protect those uses, pursuant to § 131.11. 
We agree that this process might involve creating a new designated use to protect tribal 
reserved rights, perhaps called “supports tribal reserved rights” or simply “tribal reserved 
rights,” with associated water quality criteria for that use, or developing revised criteria to 
protect the reserved right under an existing designated use (i.e., fishing), so long as the 
reserved right’s inclusion is explicit and clearly analyzed. 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
The Band does not, however, support EPA’s proposed interpretation of the requirement in 
§ 131.9(a)(1) that “WQS must protect the exercise of tribal reserved rights unsuppressed 
by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource” as being 
limited to protecting “reasonably anticipated future uses, taking into account factors that 
may have substantially altered a waterbody.”14  
 
Although resources may have been more abundant when the reserved rights were 
established, EPA’s limited interpretation is too restrictive: tribes and other interested 
parties are working toward restoration of those resources, for example by removing dams 
or conducting habitat restoration, which are actions that may not have been “reasonable 
anticipated” yet which shows that “factors that may have substantially altered a 
waterbody” can be changed. There have been extensive tribal efforts in the upper Midwest 
to restore habitat supporting the growth of wild rice. Designating waters for wild rice 
habitat even if some may claim those waters are not “reasonably anticipated” to support it 
is essential to protecting the resource and the tribal reserved rights to gather that 
resource. EPA’s narrow interpretation of this requirement therefore may result in an 
unnecessary diminishment of tribal reserved rights. 
The Band agrees with EPA’s statement that any currently practiced reserved rights are 
“presently attained uses,” that must be treated as designated uses pursuant to 40 C.F.R. § 
131.10(i), and therefore require criteria for protection under 40 C.F.R. 131.12(a)(1). And we 
appreciate that EPA appropriately recognizes that historical land uses have suppressed the 
availability of traditional aquatic resources and the water quality necessary for their 
protection. We fully support EPA’s explicit requirement in § 131.9(a)(1) that WQS must 
protect “unsuppressed” tribal reserved rights.  
Since the Band supports requiring WQS to protect unsuppressed tribal reserved rights, we 
also support adding a provision to § 131.9 requiring the designated use attainability 
analysis (UAA) in § 131.10 to take this requirement into account. See Proposed Rule at 
74372. Otherwise, a finding that a designated use protecting tribal reserved rights is not 
currently feasible under § 131.10 could undermine EPA’s and the states’ obligations to 
protect tribal reserved rights, and would essentially negate the core provisions and 
purpose of § 131.9. A fourth criterion could be added to address this issue under § 131.9(c) 
or as a new subsection § 131.9(d).  
We raise concerns, however, over the determination of level of suppression.  “Proposed 40 
CFR 131.9(a)(1) would require that WQS, to the extent supported by available data and 
information, be established to protect ‘the exercise of the tribal reserved rights 
unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic-dependent 
resource.’’’  Id.  But because the Proposed Rule does not “establish any nationally 
applicable thresholds for unsuppressed levels or use of a resource,” this determination will 
be made on a case-by-case basis.  The supplementary information lays out a balancing test 
for making this determination:  
The unsuppressed level should balance heritage use of a resource with what is  
                                                             
14 Proposed Rule at 74366-67. 

8 
 
 
 
currently reasonably achievable for a particular waterbody. For example, in 
determining the unsuppressed level of a resource for the purpose of establishing 
WQS, it may be appropriate to take into consideration both heritage rates of use of 
that resource and factors that have substantially altered the pollutant burden, 
hydrology, or availability of the resource, such that use of the resource at heritage 
rates is not feasible.15  
This language does not require or provide weight for such a balancing test, and does not 
explain what, exactly, should be taken into consideration.  
Unfortunately, the Federal Register notice is silent on what occurs when states and tribes 
disagree.  The Proposed Rule lacks any teeth to ensure that the states are giving the 
appropriate weight to the points of view of tribes or rights holders.  At minimum, the final 
rule should require states to show how the information and data provided by tribes were 
considered in the various processes outlined in this Proposed Rule (as stated above).  But 
additionally, the final rule should make clear that the information provided by tribes and 
rights holders, specifically including information that was provided through Indigenous 
Knowledge, or TEK, processes, are weighted equally to the information provided by states 
and through western scientific processes.  
Historically, tribes and states have fundamentally differed on how we approach water 
quality management, from considering how climate change will impact water resources, to 
evaluating cumulative impacts.  The often-differing approaches have the potential to lead 
to conflicting data and priorities, as well as different standards for designated uses.  As part 
of its federal treaty obligations and trust responsibility, the EPA must ensure that states do 
not discard or diminish any conflicting data or competing ideologies that come from tribes 
with tribal reserved rights.  This Proposed Rule must make clear how such differences will 
be addressed and resolved; perhaps through a defined dispute resolution process where 
rights holders can request to meet directly with the EPA Administrator to take steps to 
address those disputes, or potentially by EPA utilizing their Conflict Prevention and 
Resolution Center to mediate and resolve disputes. The Band would also anticipate that, in 
some instances, EPA itself may decide to promulgate WQS that are protective of a reserved 
right, as they did when establishing standards to protect subsistence fish consumption in 
several states. 
 
The Band also supports the requirement in § 131.9(c) that WQS must designate uses and 
establish appropriate water quality criteria to protect those uses, pursuant to § 131.11. We 
recognize that this process could involve creating a new designated use to protect the 
tribal reserved right, with associated water quality criteria for that use, or developing 
revised criteria to protect the reserved right under an existing designated use, such as 
fishing, or both of these options. However, the Band maintains that to protect tribal 
reserved rights, the antidegradation requirements referenced in § 131.9(c)(3) should be 
required in addition to the designated uses and water quality criteria required in § 
131.9(c)(1)-(2), not instead of those requirements. In other words, the regulatory text  
                                                             
15 87 Fed.Reg. at 74369 (italics added).   

9 
 
 
 
 
should say “and” instead of “and/or” when listing the requirements in § 131.9(c). The 
antidegradation options of designating Outstanding National Resource Waters (Tier 3 
protection), and to ensure that any lowering of water quality will continue to protect tribal  
reserved rights (Options 1 and 2 in the Proposed Rule at 74371) can both be used to 
support designated uses and related water quality criteria that protect reserved rights. 
 
5. Section 131.20 (State Review and Revision of WQS) 
 
The Band agrees with the inclusion of the new sentence in § 131.20(a) requiring the 
triennial review of WQS to “include evaluating whether there are tribal reserved rights 
applicable to state waters and whether water quality standards need to be revised to 
protect those rights pursuant to § 131.9.” However, the only process identified in the 
Proposed Rule for determining whether the WQS satisfy § 131.9 is the public participation 
required in existing § 131.20(b). The Band requests that EPA include a specific process to 
ensure that states directly ask for and obtain information from right holders as to their 
reserved rights. States must engage in that process while they are reviewing their WQS, 
rather than it falling to EPA to determine whether there are tribal reserved rights at issue 
once the states have already submitted their revised WQS to EPA for review and approval, 
which is when § 131.9(b) comes into play. 
 
We recommend that EPA adopt a process that explicitly requires states to contact all tribes 
with treaty protected rights within their borders, meet with them separately from the 
general public hearing provided in § 131.20, and take their input into account when 
reviewing WQS. In addition, EPA should require states to notify both the tribe or tribes 
affected and EPA if the state disagrees with the tribe’s claim to a reserved right in a 
particular resource.  These additions to the regulation should be mandatory and stringently 
enforced by EPA.  
 
Finally, it is commonly recognized that the triennial review process does not in fact take 
place every three years. To ensure that a review of WQS takes place in a timely fashion in 
response to these revised WQS regulations, another sentence should be added to § 
131.20(a) to require that, within two years of the effective date of this rulemaking, all 
states must review and, if needed, revise their WQS to protect tribal reserved rights. These 
rights, which are protected not only by the Clean Water Act, but also by the Constitution, 
have been neglected far too long. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
                          
 
Nancy Schuldt, Water Projects Coordinator 
Fond du Lac Environmental Program

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0289 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
Submitted via www.regulations.gov 
Radhika Fox 
Assistant Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
re: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions To Protect Tribal Reserved 
Rights – Proposed Rule. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
 
Dear Assistant Administrator Fox, 
The Petroleum Association of Wyoming represents companies involved in all aspects of 
responsible oil and natural gas development in Wyoming, including upstream production, 
oilfield services, midstream processing, pipeline transportation and essential work such as legal 
services, accounting, consulting and more1. Companies operating in the state of Wyoming take 
seriously their duty to attain and keep environmental quality standards, for all land, air and water. 
They have a pragmatic working relationship with the state Department of Environmental Quality 
(DEQ), which fosters a better understanding of federal and state law requirements. Though 
sometimes voluminous, the rules DEQ promulgates outline clear processes for companies to 
follow when developing compliance strategies and, correspondingly, detail enforcement actions 
available to DEQ in the event of noncompliance. The rules are clear and the oil and natural gas 
industry works hard to abide by them. The proposal before us here regarding water and its 
inclusion in Tribal Reserved Rights (TRR) is not clear. It places authorities with the EPA which 
should not be entrusted to it and creates an air of uncertainty about how enforcement may be 
handled. 
Through this action, the EPA is developing a new process to integrate into a state’s framework of 
designating water quality criteria, designated uses and antidegradation requirements during its 
triennial review of water quality standards. The new process is intended to heighten the 
 
1 PAW advocates for oil and gas development that supports sustainable production of Wyoming’s abundant 
resources; fosters mutually beneficial relationships with Wyoming’s landowners, businesses, and communities; and 
upholds the values of science-based, environmental stewardship. Recent studies show this industry supports over 
12,000 jobs in Wyoming and contributes $5 billion in economic activity. Our industry generates significant tax 
revenue to the state of Wyoming, funding state and local government operations, education and public 
infrastructure. Eighty-five percent of the oil and gas companies operating in Wyoming are classified as small 
businesses. 

consideration of TRR when setting those standards. The EPA believes that the current 
framework is insufficient to facilitate appropriate outreach to potentially affected tribes and 
ascertaining how the rights granted to tribes may be impacted by state decision-making. PAW 
asserts that the framework in place provides appropriate outreach to all stakeholders, including 
tribal nations, to provide input for the state’s consideration when setting water quality standards. 
PAW believes this new process may hinder a state’s ability to set appropriate standards by 
directing limited resources towards ambiguous requirements. 
States are required to review their designation of water quality criteria, water uses and 
requirements for antidegradation every three years, known as a triennial review of water quality 
standards. In Wyoming, the DEQ-Water Quality Division initially establishes a work group of 
diverse interests to review the current reports and offer their expertise on any new information 
the DEQ may want to consider. Once the DEQ has finished their internal revisions, those are 
issued for public comment which usually lasts 30-45 days. Next, the revisions and any public 
comments received go to the Waste & Water Quality Advisory Board. The public has an 
opportunity at this forum to again address any concerns and have those incorporated into the 
administrative record. If any deficiencies are identified, the Board has authority to send the 
revisions back to the Division for further consideration. Once passing this step, the revisions and 
public comments go before the Environmental Quality Council, which generally has the same 
authorities as the Board. The revisions then go to the Governor for approval before ultimately 
being sent to the EPA. The EPA, with its oversight role, has a final opportunity to approve or 
disapprove and remand the revisions back to the state.  
This whole process takes a long time, with great consideration to all of the potential uses and 
necessary water quality criteria, and multiple opportunities for public input. PAW believes the 
process currently in place provides every opportunity for any interested stakeholder to submit 
evidence of what a water of the United States designated use should be and the applicable 
associated water quality standard. 
In addition, outside of any formal comment period, PAW has rarely seen an instance where the 
EPA, or certainly the state of Wyoming, has not offered to meet with an interested stakeholder 
on any issue. Regulators are available and willing to meet with people to ensure the regulations 
in place are appropriate. 
The EPA’s proposed new process will inhibit the current framework. To start, the EPA will 
require states to conduct direct outreach to tribal nations with water-related reserved rights in the 
state. However, there is no clearinghouse through which a state can definitively determine which 
tribes have reserved rights within state borders. Boundaries of reserved rights are not always 
clear cut. There is no catalogued library of treaties, federal laws and executive orders detailing 
this information. It will be a difficult task for a state to determine the list of tribes with which it 
must conduct outreach. As written, the consequences of potentially missing outreach to one or 
more tribes opens the entire triennial review process up to disapproval by the EPA. 
The next step would be to define what water-related TRR have been granted through each treaty, 
federal law and executive order. These rights may be express or implied, as acknowledged by the 

EPA. This responsibility will be put on states and tribes, with a hope that expressed and implied 
reserved rights will be agreed upon. But this is no easy exercise. Too often have disagreements 
occurred on defining the extent of rights granted to tribal nations. It is obviously not the intent to 
have disagreement, but states and tribes both have an interest in defending their own rights. Once 
settled, there is no recourse, which heightens the possibility of a contentious process. These 
decisions often go to federal court for deliberation, including all the way to the U.S Supreme 
Court. This stresses state and tribal resources, limiting their capacity to focus on other important 
responsibilities.  
The next layer of uncertainty comes from the lack of clarity regarding the extent to which a state 
must consider TRR downstream, outside of its jurisdictional boundaries. The EPA states that it is 
available to facilitate interaction with tribes with reserved rights in downstream waters. For a 
state like Wyoming, which rests upon the Continental Divide, water travels north through 
Montana, east as far as the Mississippi River, south to the Gulf of Mexico and west to the Pacific 
Ocean. The EPA provides no guidance for states to consider when determining the proportion to 
which their water quality standards influence reserved rights, perhaps to tribes thousands of 
river-miles downstream. 
In addition to these concerns, if finalized, the EPA will expand its jurisdiction by anointing itself 
as decider of tribal reserved right. This is due to the fact that, through its oversight authority, the 
EPA will be the entity with final say on whether a state appropriately considered its water quality 
standards effects on TRR. To make that determination, the EPA would have to decide the 
breadth of each right granted to each tribe. The EPA was not granted this responsibility, nor does 
it have the capacity or expertise to make such determinations. 
This all matters to oil and gas companies operating in Wyoming because they are required to 
maintain water quality standards based on designated uses. Each operation with a point source 
discharge is permitted before that activity can occur. If water quality criteria, designated uses or 
antidegradation requirements change, that may require the state to amend an operator’s permit to 
reflect the new standard. Companies appreciate this process and comply accordingly. Yet now, 
the EPA’s process will incorporate uncertainty into this regulatory program. At too many points 
during this new process, disagreements can occur about whether a state met with all necessary 
tribes and whether a state appropriately considered TRR when setting water quality standards. 
The EPA’s heightened oversight authority in this area may lead to more instances of the EPA 
disapproving state revisions or could lead to more instances of litigation. The pendulum of water 
quality standards may swing until a final decision is made in federal court. All the while, 
companies may have invested in new discharge technologies to comply with standards that 
ultimately weren’t appropriate for a water body.  
PAW does appreciate the responsibility of all three entities – tribal governments, the federal 
government and state governments – to work collaboratively to ensure the actions of one do not 
affect the jurisdiction of another. PAW suggests that if the EPA does take action on this subject, 
it should remove the asserted disapproval and enforcement concepts if a state inadvertently fails 
to identify all tribes, reserved rights and water quality standard’s effects on those. PAW believes 
that a simplified but more deliberate effort for states to attempt to identify and consider rights 

granted to tribes within its boundaries would suffice. Doing so will foster more robust outreach 
to tribal nations, while not straining the overall effort. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Colin McKee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Regulatory Affairs Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Petroleum Association of Wyoming 
 
cc: 
The Honorable John Barrasso, U.S. Senate, State of Wyoming 
 
The Honorable Cynthia Lummis, U.S. Senate, State of Wyoming 
 
The Honorable Harriet Hageman, U.S. House of Representatives, State of Wyoming 
 
The Honorable Mark Gordon, Governor, State of Wyoming 
 
Todd Parfitt, Director, Wyoming Department of Environmental Quality

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0279 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Ke..n AkQuetut 
Secretary of Energy & Environment 
Kevin Stin 
Governor 
STATE OF OKLAHMIA 
OFFICE OF THE 
SECRETARY OF ENERGY & ENVIRONMENT 
March 6, 2023 
Submitted via: https://www.regulations.gov/ 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
RE: 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions To Protect Tribal Reserved Right, EPA Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
On behalf of my office and the Oklahoma Department of Environmental Quality, please accept the 
following comments in response to EPA's Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions To Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, EPA Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791, 87 
Fed. Reg. 74,361 (Dec. 5, 2022). The proposed rule, if fmalized, would have a substantial impact 
on the State of Oklahoma. As such, the opportunity to provide comments on the proposed rule, as 
well as EPA's consideration of said comments, is greatly appreciated. 
As an initial matter, the precise relationship between water quality standards and reserved rights 
is unclear. However, the State of Oklahoma recognizes and appreciates the need, and without 
question shares the desire, to protect water rights and beneficial uses of water, including tribal 
reserved rights. Nevertheless, as drafted, the proposed rule would be essentially impossible to 
successfully implement in our State, and would undoubtedly and inappropriately, provide an 
opportunity for the federalization of Water Quality Standards in Oklahoma. Consequently, for the 
reasons detailed below, the State of Oklahoma requests that EPA not fmalize the proposed rule. 
Determination of Reserved Rights 
It appears that the intended purpose of the proposed rule is to ensure that reserved rights are 
adequately preserved and protected by new or existing Water Quality Standards. 
A key 
requirement in the proposal is that States gather information and determine the nature and extent 
of reserved rights impacted by such Water Quality Standards. First and foremost, it does not 
appear that EPA has the authority to make a determination related to reserved rights, let alone the 
ability to delegate such authority to the States. Notwithstanding this lack of authority, prior to 
considering the role that Water Quality Standards play in protecting and preserving reserved rights 
(and definitely prior to determining that new and existing Water Quality Standards must 
1 

affirmatively demonstrate that such reserved rights are adequately protected), the reserved rights 
shouldfirst be determined or adjudicated kv a court of competent jurisdiction. As EPA recognized 
in the proposed rule, determining the nature and extent of a reserved right requires an incredibly 
complex analysis. As defined in the proposed rule, a reserved right includes "any rights to aquatic 
and/or aquatic-dependent resources reserved or held by tribes, either expressly or implicitly, 
through treaties, statutes, executive orders, or other sources of Federal law." 87 Fed. Reg. at 
74,362. The sources of Federal law that establish reserved rights do not typically lay out the 
precise nature and extent of the reserved right, but instead require a determination of the nature 
and extent of the right necessary to satisfy the purpose of the reservation. Every element of the 
proposed definition requires an extremely complex analysis: "any rights;" "aquatic and/or aquatic-
dependent resources;" "reserved or held;" "expressly or implicitly;" and "through treaties, statues, 
executive orders, or other sources of Federal law." 
To further complicate the determination, the proposed rule also provides that the States must 
determine what constitutes the unsuppressed use of any reserved resources (unsuppressed by water 
quality or availability), which requires the consideration of past, present, and future uses (which 
in turn requires taking "into account factors that may have substantially altered a waterbody."). 87 
Fed. Reg. at 74,367. This type of determination is difficult anywhere (as evidenced by the 
enormous number of State and Federal court cases dealing with such adjudications) and would be 
especially challenging in Oklahoma considering that 39 federally recognized tribal nations are 
located within the State's exterior boundaries and that Indian country in Oklahoma ranges from 
reservations to over one hundred thousand acres of tribal trust land scattered across the State. 
Determining the nature and extent of the reserved rights applicable to each tribal nation would be 
especially difficult considering that any such reserved rights were likely created through separate 
and distinct treaties, statutes, executive orders, and/or other sources of Federal law. 
Primary Role of States in Protecting Water Quality 
Considering the geographic extent of Oklahoma's unique jurisdictional situation, each statewide 
Water Quality Standard could potentially implicate reserved rights involving all 39 federally 
recognized tribal nations in Oklahoma. In addition, it appears that the proposed rule would also 
require the State to determine that all existing Water Quality Standards are adequately protective 
of all reserved rights during the required triennial review, and that such a determination would 
have to reoccur every three years. See 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,367 (Pursuant to the proposed rule, when 
conducting the triennial review of existing Water Quality Standards, States are required to "include 
an evaluation of whether there are tribal reserved rights applicable to waters subject to the state's 
WQS and whether WQS need to be revised to protect those rights."). The complexity of 
determining the nature and extent of reserved rights makes any single determination made by a 
State vulnerable to challenge by EPA or a third-party. When the number of new and existing 
Water Quality Standards is multiplied by the number of tribal nations potentially holding reserved 
rights in Oklahoma, the resulting number of complex and potentially controversial reserved rights 
determinations all but guarantees that the State would face difficult challenges to the nature and 
extent determination alone. The likelihood of challenge becomes even greater considering that 
each one of those determinations would likely need to be reviewed and updated every three years. 
These vulnerabilities will exist even before the State makes the difficult determinations related to 
the quality of water necessary to protect and preserve the reserved rights. 
2 

Again, the sheer number of court cases involving the determination of reserved rights demonstrates 
the difficulty involved in making such determinations, as well as the likelihood that any such State 
determination would be vulnerable to an infinite number of potential challenges. If, as proposed, 
such a determination is considered by EPA to be a prerequisite to developing approvable Water 
Quality Standards, then the challenge of any such determination is all but guaranteed and would 
be a potential justification for EPA to disapprove any related standard developed by the State, 
which would likely result in the federalization of Water Quality Standards in Oklahoma. In other 
words, requiring such a challenging determination to occur as part of the Water Quality Standards 
promulgation process, provides EPA with much geater discretion in determining that a State's 
standard is insufficient. The proposed rule recognizes that EPA must promulgate a Federal Water 
Quality Standard if it believes a State standard does not adequately protect a reserved right. 
Moreover, the complexity of such a determination would also bring the process of developing and 
promulgating new and revised Water Quality Standards to a halt. Failing to meet the required 
timelines could, in and of itself, provide a justification for EPA to federalize Water Quality 
Standards in Oklahoma. As stated by EPA in the proposed rule, "[s]hould a state fail to meet this 
tight timeline, EPA would be obligated to promulgate WQS for the state." 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,363. 
Mandating a determination that results in making a State's ability to successfully promulgate 
Water Quality Standards so vulnerable to challenge would be inconsistent with Congress' intent 
that the States are charged with the primary responsibility and right to prevent, reduce, and 
eliminate water pollution and to plan the development and use of water resources within their 
boundaries. See 33 U.S.C. § 1251(b) ("It is the policy of the Congress to recognize, preserve, and 
protect the primary responsibilities and rights of States to prevent, reduce, and eliminate pollution, 
to plan the development and use (including restoration, preservation, and enhancement) of land 
and water resources."). 
Burden on State Resources and Uncertain Regutatory Process 
Determining reserved rights is not typically a State environmental agency responsibility. 
Generally, State environment agencies do not have the expertise or personnel necessary to conduct 
the required complex reserved rights determinations. The creation of such a new and expansive 
responsibility would place a significant burden on already strained State resources. The potential 
impact on State resources from an unfunded federal mandate such as that required in the proposed 
rule cannot be overstated. In addition to the strain on State resources, the uncertainty related to 
determining the nature and extent of all reserved rights that must be protected in new and existing 
Water Quality Standards would result in a corresponding uncertainty to the adequacy of existing 
water quality discharge permits and the availability of new or modified discharge permits. This 
uncertainty would place a significant burden on the State water agencies and the regulated 
community. . 

Conclusion 
As mentioned above, the State of Oklahoma appreciates the opportunity to comment on the 
proposed rule. Furthermore, the State strongly supports the protection of water rights and 
beneficial uses of water; however, the proposed rule, as drafted, is unworkable and would likely 
result in the federalization of Water Quality Standards in Oklahoma. Consequently, the State 
requests that EPA not finalize the proposed rule. 
Sincerely, 
Ken McQueen 
Secretary of Energy & Environment 
4

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0182 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
1 
 
Submitted via www.regulations.gov 
 
March 3, 2023 
 
Hon. Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, D.C.  20460 
 
Re: 
Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-079, RIN 2040-AG17 
 
Dear Administrator Regan:  
 
The Petroleum Alliance of Oklahoma (The Alliance) appreciates this opportunity to provide 
comments on the above-captioned rulemaking.  The Alliance represents more than 1,400 
individuals and member companies and their tens of thousands of employees in the upstream, 
midstream, and downstream sectors and ventures ranging from small, family-owned businesses to 
large, publicly traded corporations. Our members produce, transport, process and refine the bulk of 
Oklahoma’s crude oil and natural gas. 
 
The Alliance acknowledges the states’ role in establishing and regularly reviewing water 
quality standards for waters within each state’s external boundaries.  Those standards form the basis 
for other Clean Water Act programs, such as water-quality-based effluent limitations and section 
401 and 404 permits.  Clearly, these are critical responsibilities under the Clean Water Act and the 
State of Oklahoma has a robust program in place to meet the state’s water quality obligations.  
Similarly, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) must acknowledge the State of Oklahoma’s 
existing unique, complex legal framework as it relates to tribes.  Thirty-nine Native American tribes 
call Oklahoma home. The Alliance appreciates and values what American Indians and tribes 
contribute to the state’s economy, culture and diversity.  The tribes are a vital part of our state. 
Oklahoma’s non-Indians and tribal members alike share a common interest in economic prosperity. 
 
 
However, The Alliance has a number of concerns about this proposed rulemaking.  
Fundamentally, we question EPA’s authority to promulgate this rule that requires determination of 
tribal reserved rights and delegates these responsibilities to the various states.  These rights can only 
be adjudicated by federal courts; EPA has no implied or explicit congressional grant of authority to 
engage in such a practice.  To the extent EPA has the authority to adopt and implement this rule, we 
believe it necessary to remind the agency of how the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient 
Transportation Equity Act of 2005 (SAFETEA) limits EPA’s authority and delegation of 
environmental protection responsibilities in Oklahoma.   
 
 
Moreover, if the agency proceeds with this rule, the financial impact to state water quality 
programs such as Oklahoma’s will be substantial.  The work program outlined by the proposed rule 
will demand a significant investment of human resources and time – far more significant than EPA 

 
 
 
2 
 
appears to acknowledge.  Then, the proposed rule anticipates an EPA review of the work done by 
the state, effectively duplicating the effort to establish treaty-based water quality standards.  The 
agency’s tentative decision that this new rule will not impose an unfunded mandate on states like 
Oklahoma is far off the mark.   
 
Finally, EPA’s proposal will have significant and profound impacts on all Oklahoma 
citizens, surrounding states, and our members.  For all of these reasons, we call on EPA to 
reconsider the basis for this rule and withdraw it. 
 
I. 
EPA LACKS THE LEGAL AUTHORITY TO ADOPT THIS RULE 
In the preamble to this proposed rule, EPA cites instances where federal courts have found 
that a treaty, statute, or executive order expressly or impliedly reserved certain rights to certain 
Indian tribes.  United States v. Winans, 196 U.S. 371 (1905), may be the progenitor of the line of 
cases finding that tribes may reserve certain rights when treating with the United States.  The 
decisions in Winters v. United States, 207 U.S. 564, 576 (1908), United States v. Washington, 520 
F.2d 676, 687 (9th Cir. 1975), cert denied 423 U.S. 1086, 96 S. Ct. 877 (1976), and Sohappy v. 
Smith, 302 F. Supp. 899 (D. Or. 1969) reflect the line of federal court decisions supporting the 
express or implied reservation of certain rights.  
The Alliance takes no issue with these decisions, nor with decisions confirming that treaties 
and similar agreements represent the supreme law of the land.  See., e.g., Skokomish Indian Tribe v. 
United States, 410 F.3d 506, 512 (9th Cir. 2005).  However, we note that every case to which EPA 
cites is a decision of the federal judiciary recognizing tribal rights, including implied and express 
reserved rights.  EPA does not – and cannot – cite to any authority enabling a federal agency to 
supplant the judicial role in interpreting treaties, statutes, executive orders, and other devices for 
entering into agreements with Indian tribes.  It is unclear whether EPA is proposing to require 
states, and ultimately the EPA, to interpret treaties and similar documents to determine whether 
they convey reserved rights.  If that is EPA’s intention, then the agency is acting outside its 
statutory and Constitutional powers. 
 
The Alliance is concerned that it appears EPA has arrogated upon itself not only the power 
to determine whether such reserved rights exist, as well as their scope and breadth, but that EPA 
believes it may delegate that same authority to state governments.1  In the long line of cases cited 
by the EPA, and in the discussion found in the preeminent authority on Indian law, there is no hint 
that a federal agency may determine or delegate such a profound responsibility to state 
governments.2  COHEN’S HANDBOOK OF FEDERAL INDIAN LAW, (Neil Jessup Newton ed., 2012).   
 
 
1 EPA has often stated that as a general rule it will not recognize state jurisdiction over federal regulatory programs in 
Indian country.  
2 While we firmly believe Oklahoma is capable of carrying out this responsibility with integrity and fairness, we find it 
particularly ironic that EPA proposes to delegate this responsibility to the entities that, more often than not, have 
questioned tribal reserved rights claims, e.g., United States v. Washington, 853 F.3d 946, 966, (9th Cir. 2017), aff’d , 138 
S.Ct.1832 (per curiam). 

 
 
 
3 
 
Finally, we also note that section 518 of the Clean Water Act authorizes EPA to treat 
eligible tribes with Indian reservations as a state (treatment as a state, or TAS) for purposes of 
administering section 303 of the Act.3  No other provision of the Act speaks to the EPA’s authority 
with respect to tribal rights on or off reservation.  Those statutory provisions imply the absence of 
other authority in this regard and that EPA’s proposal here falls outside its authority. 
 
It is on these bases we challenge the EPA’s authority to adopt this rule.  EPA should 
withdraw the proposed rule. 
 
II. 
SAFETEA OF 2005 LIMITS EPA’S AUTHORITY 
In addition to questioning EPA’s legal authority for the proposed rule, The Alliance believes 
EPA has failed to take into account the unique and complex landscape that exists in Oklahoma.   
Section 10211 of SAFETEA4 clarified and streamlined the State of Oklahoma’s role in managing 
virtually all environmental media within the state’s exterior borders. 
Subsection (a) of Section 10211 provides that if the EPA Administrator has approved 
regulatory programs submitted by the State of Oklahoma for implementation of federal 
environmental programs in non-Indian country, then upon request of the State, the Administrator 
shall approve the State to administer the State programs within certain areas of Indian country.  
Significantly, SAFETEA does not provide EPA Administrator discretion to consider the merits or 
circumstances of the State request or to impose conditions on approval; if the State’s request falls 
within the statute’s parameters, then the Administrator must grant the State’s request. It is virtually 
a ministerial task on the Administrator’s part. 
On July 22, 2020, the Governor of Oklahoma duly requested approval under Section 
10211(a) of SAFETEA to administer in Indian country those environmental programs that had 
previously been approved by EPA for application outside Indian country.5 In a letter to the 
Governor dated October 1, 2020, the Administrator acknowledged that despite its general practice 
with respect to Indian country, EPA must apply the statutory mandate embodied by SAFETEA6 and 
grant the Governor’s request.  The EPA Administrator’s approval applied to all of the State of 
Oklahoma’s existing EPA-approved regulatory programs, including, but not limited to, water 
quality standards and implementation plans7 and national pollutant discharge elimination system 
programs8 of the CWA implemented by a range of state agencies.9 
 
3 A number of tribes have been approved by EPA for treatment as a state for purposes of implementing section 303 of 
the Clean Water Act.  https://www.epa.gov/tribal/tribes-approved-treatment-state-tas (last visited Feb. 20, 2023). 
4 Pub. L. 109-59, 199 Stat. 1144, 1937 (Aug. 10, 2005). 
5 The state did not seek authority over certain excepted lands, including Indian allotments, lands held in trust by the 
United States on behalf of individual Indians or a tribe, or certain lands owned in fee by a tribe. 
6 The Administrator’s letter to the Governor noted that “to the extent EPA’s prior approvals of these State programs 
excluded Indian country, any such exceptions are superseded for the geographic areas of Indian country covered by this 
approval under SAFETEA.” 
7 Section 303, 33 U.S.C. § 1313. 
8 Section 402, 33 U.S.C. § 1342. 
9 On December 22, 2021, EPA proposed to withdraw and reconsider the October 1, 2020, decision approving the 
Governor of the State of Oklahoma’s request to extend approval of the state’s EPA-approved environmental regulatory 

 
 
 
4 
 
Subsection (b) of Section 10211 of SAFETEA is also relevant to understanding the state’s 
exclusive regulatory authority over most of the state. Subsection (b) specifies that EPA may extend 
treatment as a state status for purposes of administering environmental programs to an Oklahoma 
tribe only if the state voluntarily enters into a cooperative agreement with the tribe for treatment of 
a tribe as a state and concurrently agrees to joint administration of an environmental program’s 
requirements.10 
Congress clearly articulated its intent in the SAFETEA provision regarding Oklahoma and 
EPA may not disregard this law.  EPA should withdraw the proposed rule.  At a bare minimum, 
EPA must explain how it has taken the SAFTEA provision into account in developing new program 
requirements for the section 303 water standards programs that would otherwise apply in 
Oklahoma. 
 
III. 
THE PROPOSED RULE WILL HAVE A SIGNIFICANT  
IMPACT ON OKLAHOMA 
Assuming for the purposes of this discussion that there may be reserved rights in Oklahoma, 
the proposed rule would require states such as Oklahoma to dedicate significant new resources to 
developing water quality standards for the state’s numerous water bodies.  It appears that EPA 
minimizes the scope and depth of those new program requirements. 
First, as just noted, states would be required to evaluate whether there are tribal reserved 
rights applicable to waters subject to state water quality standards.  EPA does not explain how 
Oklahoma would make such a decision in the absence of judicial decrees affirming such rights.   
Second, states such as Oklahoma would have to collect information about the scope, nature, 
and current and past use of tribal activities as informed by the tribes.  In doing so, the state would 
be required not only to consult with tribes but also to consult other sources of information regarding 
potential reserved rights, including information about the geographic scope of any such rights, plus 
relevant information about the level of water quality needed to preserve the potential reserved 
rights.  Determining the level of water quality necessary to protect any aquatic dependent resource 
or users would require the state to weigh multiple lines of evidence.  That could include fish 
consumption surveys, studies of heritage fish consumption rates, reports on pollutant levels that 
could adversely affect the aquatic-related resource, and monitoring data reflecting current and 
historic water quality. 
 
programs to certain areas of Indian country within the state of Oklahoma. See https://www.epa.gov/ok/proposed-
withdrawal-and-reconsideration-and-supporting-information (last visited July 19, 2022). EPA acknowledged the request 
was made pursuant to Section 10211(a) of SAFETEA. EPA stated it sought greater consultation with affected tribes and 
the need to review implementation of EPA programs by the State of Oklahoma. 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-12/notice-of-proposed-withdrawal-and-reconsideration_0.pdf (last 
visited July 19, 2022). In a comment letter dated January 31, 2022, the State of Oklahoma forcefully rebutted the EPA’s 
authority to reconsider or withdraw the Administrator’s earlier decision to approve the state’s request to extend 
approval of the state’s EPA-approved environmental regulatory programs into certain areas of Indian country within the 
state. See https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-02/state-of-oklahoma-comment.pdf.    
10 Such a cooperative agreement would require approval by EPA Administrator after notice and an opportunity for 
public hearing. 

 
 
 
5 
 
In a remarkable understatement, EPA acknowledges this may involve a “complex inquiry.”  
In Oklahoma, it would require the state to canvas 39 federally recognized tribes and virtually every 
water course in the state.  Moreover, EPA concedes in its Economic Analysis11 that determining the 
geographical location and scope of tribal reserved rights, the scope and nature of aquatic and 
aquatic-dependent resources, and whether those resources are protected by existing water quality 
standards could require a “detailed legal and scientific analysis.” 
Third, in cases where water quality is lower than necessary to allow for tribes to fully 
exercise their reserved rights, states such as Oklahoma would be required to establish water quality 
standards to protect potential reserved rights “unsuppressed by water quality or availability of the 
aquatic or aquatic dependent resource.”  This alone would demand a significant investment of 
human and taxpayer resources.  Many states, including Oklahoma, would have to start their 
inquiries from zero. 
In addition, states like Oklahoma would have to conduct enhanced coordination with 
surrounding states.  For example, surface water flowing from one state into another that may impact 
a tribe’s reserved right would provide its own unique set of challenges. 
The materials above represent a brief summary of the task that EPA seeks to impose upon 
states.  In a state such as Oklahoma, with 39 federally recognized tribes, it would demand a 
significant dedication of resources aside from the regular water quality work performed by state 
agencies.  It also would involve the state in reconciling competing claims among tribes on the same 
water courses, an inevitable occurrence.  EPA offers no guidance on how a state would reconcile 
different tribes’ claims on the same water course; indeed, that is not a state’s role.  Of course, it 
would immerse the state in an entirely new endeavor of seeking to define not only the existence of 
reserved rights but also their scope and breadth.  All of this has immense implications for state 
management not only of water quality, but also state allocation of water resources.   
Over the course of decades, states such as Oklahoma have developed complex, sophisticated 
statutory and successful regulatory programs for water resource allocation.  The proposed rule 
threatens to violate section 33 U.S.C. § 1251(b), which restates Congress’s policy to recognize, 
preserve, and protect the primary responsibilities of states to plan for the development and use of 
land and water resources. 
It is important to note that withdrawal of this proposal does not diminish tribes’ ability to 
provide input into the State of Oklahoma’s regulatory water program.  Tribes, as with any other 
citizen in the state, are always allowed to engage in the state’s rulemaking actions as provided by 
well-established Oklahoma laws, regulations, processes, and procedures.  For all of these reasons, 
in addition to the legal and policy concerns outlined above, the Alliance urges EPA to withdraw this 
proposed rule. 
 
 
 
 
11 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Economic Analysis for Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to 
Protect Tribal reserved Rights (hereinafter Economic Analysis) at 5. 

 
 
 
6 
 
IV. 
EPA’S SUBSEQUENT REVIEW WOULD DUPLICATE THE  
STATES’ WORK AND ANALYSIS 
As we explained above, setting water quality standards that comport with tribal reserved 
rights would be a substantial undertaking in any state but even more so in Oklahoma, which is 
home to 39 federally recognized tribes.  Yet after setting water quality standards as part of each 
triennial review, EPA would then initiate its own consultation with tribes to determine whether 
applicable reserved rights are protected.  “This consultation will inform EPA’s determination 
pursuant to 40 CFR 131.5(a)(9) as to whether [water quality standards] protect tribal reserved 
rights, where applicable.”  87 Fed. Reg. 74361, 74,372 (Dec. 5, 2022).  In addition, EPA explains in 
the preamble to the proposed rule that in this consultation process EPA would seek “information 
and input regarding applicable tribal reserved rights.”  Id. 
It appears that in reviewing state water quality standards adopted pursuant to this rule, EPA 
would duplicate much of the work done by states in identifying tribal water rights as well as their 
scope and breadth, in combination with EPA’s review based on other criteria.  We presume that in 
order to assure itself that states have appropriately identified tribal rights, EPA will necessarily have 
to examine treaties and other similar documents, as well as other historical materials, in some detail.  
The states will already have done so.  Even after the states have engaged in a challenging and 
demanding process, EPA may second-guess or even deny the state’s water quality standards.  EPA 
should explain the need for this duplicative exercise.   
 
V. 
EPA’s ECONOMIC ANALYSIS GRAVELY UNDERESTIMATES THE 
FINANCIAL IMPACTS OF THESE NEW RULE 
 
In the preamble to the proposed rule and in the Economic Analysis, EPA concedes the need 
for a detailed legal and scientific analysis of not only the existence, scope, and extent of reserved 
rights, but also of the extant water quality and the water quality needed to sustain water dependent 
species.  In addition, the agency anticipates states may need to make changes in their water quality 
regulatory program, including potential rulemakings to update designated uses, adopt new or 
modified water quality criteria, and even add waters to the list of Outstanding National Resource 
Waters.12  In fact, EPA remarks that “States may incur costs for rulemaking activities such as 
reviewing existing WQS in relation to protection of tribal reserved rights; collecting data; 
performing technical, economic, and legal analysis of proposed WQS changes; developing 
proposed WQS regulation revisions; engaging in stakeholder outreach and the public comment 
process; and promulgating final regulations.”13 
 
EPA also acknowledges that tribes may have claims to different types of resources that 
require different levels of water quality.  As a result, states may have to update their water quality 
standards in “stages,” focusing on protection of different resources at different times.  Or in other 
words, the process EPA is proposing could stretch out over multiple triennial reviews.14  In 
addition, EPA’s Economic Analysis concedes that “[t]he cost of resources required to collect data 
and perform analyses is unknown. The number of analyses will depend on the number of [water 
 
12 Economic Analysis at 6. 
13 Id. 
14 Id. 

 
 
 
7 
 
quality standard] changes needed to protect reserved rights and the sufficiency of existing, readily 
available data on the scope of the right(s) and level of water quality necessary to protect those 
rights.”15 
Despite explaining the potential challenges to implementing this new rule and identifying a 
number of unknowns, EPA estimated that the total cost per state to comply with the proposed rule 
would max out at $98,911.  In its view, if all 50 states had to engage in this exercise the costs would 
not exceed a total of just under $5 million. 
It is possible that Oklahoma could simply report there are no adjudicated express or implied 
treaty rights to water-dependent species. That may well be the case.  But if EPA declines to accept 
that response, Oklahoma will have to review materials applicable to as many as 39 federally 
recognized tribes with potential competing claims to the same or multiple water bodies.  Perhaps at 
that point, Oklahoma could again report that there are no adjudicated express or implied treaty 
rights to water-dependent species in the state.  Were EPA to again reject that response, and if 
Oklahoma had to conduct the study and analysis required by this rule, that likely could not be 
completed for under $5 million. 
There are, thus, two salient problems with EPA’s proposal.  First, it fails to explain what 
kind of inquiry states must pursue in cases where there are or may be no adjudicated express or 
implied treaty rights to water-dependent species.  Second, EPA has grossly underestimated the costs 
to states associated with complying with this rule.   
Under those circumstances, this proposal unequivocally would constitute an unfunded 
mandate. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
For the reasons discussed above, we request EPA withdraw this rule.  The Alliance 
appreciates the opportunity to provide comments to the EPA on the proposed rule.  If you have 
questions, please contact me at angie@okpetro.com or 405-601-2124. 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
  
Angie Burckhalter 
Senior V.P. of Regulatory & Environmental Affairs 
 
 
cc: 
Jennifer Brundage  
Office of Water Standards and Health Protection Division 
brundage.jennifer@epa.gov 
 
15 Id. at 10.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0271 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
,m) 
Michael Regan, Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
March 6, 2023 
Re: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
The Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians ("Lac du Flambeau 
Tribe") is a federally-recognized Indian Tribe, centered within the Lac du Flambeau Reservation 
located in Vilas, Oneida and Iron Counties in Northern Wisconsin. The Lac du Flambeau Tribe 
also retains interest in ceded lands in Wisconsin, Michigan and Minnesota; these lands were 
ceded to the United States government in the Treaties of 1837, 1842 and 1854. 
Waaswagoning, or Place of the Torch, later named Lac du Flambeau by French fur-
traders, the main village sits at the northern point of Flambeau Lake. Kiishkiman moved the band 
into this area after overpowering the Dakota, Sac, and Fox tribes in the 1700s. While there was 
one main village, Waaswagoning, small villages were established throughout the area. At 
Waaswagoning the Ojibwe were still living• a semi-nomadic life, moving seasonally to gather 
where the wild harvest was most abundant but returning to the village throughout the year. 
Currently, there are just over 4000+ enrolled Anishinaabe members of the Lac du 
Flambeau Tribe with numerous descendants. They currently are maintaining their hunting, 
fishing and gathering way of life in a manner that can be sustained for seven generations. By 
hunting, fishing and gathering, they can meet the cultural, subsistence, economic, medicinal and 
spiritual needs of the cornmunity. In order to be able to continue to hunt, fish and gather, there 
needs to be clean, healthy and abundant natural resources, especially water resources, available. 
The Federal Government is obligated to fulfill the treaty rights by providing clean, healthy 
natural resources to meet the needs and requirements of the Tribes. 
Water is as fundamental as blood in your veins, we cannot survive without it. The Tribe 
cannot overemphasize enough on how important clean water is in order to meet their cultural, 
subsistence, economic, medicinal and spiritual needs. 
c du Flambeau Band 
of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians 
P.O. ox 67 - Lac du Flambeau, Wisconsin 5453 
(115) 586-3303 FAX (715) 588-7930 

EC1 LKE 
ERYAT 
Lac du Flambeau IHbal Reservation and ceded territory (within yellow 
borders) 
The Lac du Flambeau Tribe submits the following questions and comments in regards to the 
revisions to the federal water quality standards (WQS) regulations to protect tribal reserved 
rights. 
The Lac du Flambeau Tribe appreciates EPA's willingness to propose a rulemaking that 
recognizes "States and EPA must not impair tribal reserved rights when establishing, revising, 
and approving WQS," but EPA needs to recognize the federal obligation and trust responsibility 
cannot be delegated. 
The Lac du Flambeau Tribe specifically has concerns on how the proposed rule will be 
implemented and enforced by EPA. There are many instances where States have failed to 
protect treaty reserved rights and many more instances where the State lacks a WQS for a 
treaty resource. For an example, the Lac du Flambeau Tribe holds treaty reserved rights within 
the ceded territory of Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Michigan. Minnesota has failed to implement 
their wild rice water quality standard for decades and Wisconsin lacks the existence of a wild 
rice water quality standard. There is no affirmative language within the final proposed rule 
indicating enforcement of the rule by EPA. There is also no clear language detailing how EPA 
intends to resolve disputes between States and the Tribes. 
The following comments and questions were brought forth during the August 10th  2021 
consultation meeting and that were sent to Ms. Jennifer Brundage on September 13th  2021, 
which are still unresolved. 

—
The Lac du Flambeau Tribe is not confident with EPA's ability to enforce any potential 
revisions to regulations in order to protect tribal treaty rights; or to promulgate WQS for 
States that would be protective enough to meet our subsistence, economic, cultural, 
medicinal and spiritual needs. How will EPA remedy the problem as stated above? 
—
In the EPA's presentation given to the Tribes during the consultation on August 10th 
2021, it states that "States and EPA must not impair tribal reserved rights when 
establishing, revising, and approving WQS." How exactly is EPA going to ensure that the 
States not impair tribal reserved rights? 
-
Lac du Flambeau Tribe understands that EPA will review the State's WQS to ensure they 
are in compliance with 40 CFR Part 131 (and 132 for the Great Lakes), but what will be 
EPA's steps to ensuring that the States are in compliance with the potential new 
revisions? 
-
In EPA's response letter to the August 10th  2021 consultation, EPA stated that the 
following bullet items were not within the scope of this potential rule. All these factors 
are either indirectly or directly tied to WQS and to treaty reserved rights. Any revisions to 
the regulations at 40 CFR Part 131 must be able to address the inadequacies of agencies 
not protecting tribal reserved rights, which does include but not limited to: 
—
Lack of state enforcement of Minnesota's existing numeric sulfate criterion 
—
Reducing mercury pollution and detecting and remediating potential PFAS 
pollution in lakes where the Band has reserved rights to fish 
-
Addressing impacts to other media which are interconnected with surface water, 
including air, soil, and groundwater. 
-
Addressing pharmaceutical pollution 
The state of Wisconsin's allowance of permitting by state, county, and municipal 
agencies within the reservation without the tribe's input in many different arenas, 
ftom septic sewage to surface water discharges 
How exactly are they not within the scope of this potential rule? 
—
Were there any Tribal representatives being consulted (other than this official 
consultation period) in drafting the proposal? In addition, who would be EPA's expert on 
tribal reserved rights? 
—
During a Tribal Water Division call on August 24th  2022, there were concerns in regards 
to exposing treaty rights to litigation risks during this process, what solutions does EPA 
have to ensure that Tribal Treaty Rights will not be impacted? 
-
During the same Tribal Water Division call, it was indicated by EPA legal counsel that 
this framework should have flexibility built into it to consider different types of treaties 
within Region 5; What would that flexibility look like? How would EPA deal with 
different treaties? 

There was no specific language in the final proposal giving direction how EPA is going 
to handle different treaties or tribal reserved rights span over multiple entities boundaries 
with exception of "Additionally, tribal reserved rights to a particular resource may span 
across multiple states. These situations would likely require significant coordination 
among all parties to develop WQS to protect all applicable rights. EPA is available to 
facilitate dialogue between and among states and tribes, where appropriate" 87 Fed. Reg. 
74372. Coordination and facilitating dialogue will not be sufficient enough to assist 
Tribes and States in proinulgating WQS to protect treaty rights. 
—
How will the EPA respond to comments from States and other agencies that do not 
support the revisions? 
▪
Will the Tribes get an opportunity to receive and address those comments before 
final decision are made by EPA? 
—
What are the deciding factors on whether the revisions will take place or not? Who has 
more influence on the deciding factors, the States or Tribes? 
—
How will waterbodies that are important to the Tribes even though they may not be 
classified as "Waters of the United States" be covered? 
-
How will accumulative impacts to the ecosystem be considered in the revisions? 
The Lac du Flambeau Tribe supports all comments contained in the Great Lakes Indian 
Fish and Wildlife Commission (GLIFWC) and the National Tribal Water Council (NTWC) 
letters to EPA in regards to the revisions to the federal regulations to protect tribal reserved 
rights. Lac du Flambeau Tribe is also providing key recommendations and comments in this 
letter taken from GLIFWC and NTWCs comment letters below: 
GLIFWC key reconunendations from their letter dated March 6th 2023: 
Section III. Procedural Concerns. A. The Proposed Rule Codifies an Overly Deferential State 
Led Process.  
•
The final rule should ensure that there is a system by which a minimum threshold 
for state engagement with rights holders is developed, and by which a uniform 
process for consideration of tribal reserved rights is developed. 
•
The final rule should also create a system by which there is a minimum threshold 
of engagement between EPA and tribes to ensure the EPA retains its federal trusl 
responsibility and does not improperly rely on the states. 
•
EPA must require states to communicate early and often with tribes throughout 
their WQS processes. 
•
The EPA must make clear that competing lines of inquiry must be balanced 
between the states and tribes. 
Section III. Procedural Concerns. B. Additional Burden on Tribes.  
•
that EPA implement, in this rule, a process that coordinates the review between 
states that share ceded territories or usual and accustomed places; 

•
that EPA ensure there are resources to support full time staff to effectively 
participate, and that the EPA has the resources to provide effective technical 
assistance; 
•
that where tribal reserved rights have been adjudicated, there are no lines of 
inquiry to be made into the existence or scope of those rights; and 
•
that the final rule reflect a preference for adopting designated uses specific to 
tribal reserved rights. This way, it will be more difficult for tribal uses to be 
•subsumed within other considerations. It may also be necessary to adopt specific 
criteria to protect tribal reserved rights as well as implernent antidegradation 
measures. 
Section IV. Data Concerns. A. Potentially Sensitive Information.  
•
Any final rule should recognize the sensitivity of some of this information, 
especially in light of the sometimes-fraught relationships between tribes and 
states, and require states to respect tribal boundaries for sharing sensitive 
information. 
•
Any final rule should create a standard practice for how sensitive information will 
be dealt with in the WQS processes. 
•
Any sensitive information should explicitly be protected from Freedom of 
Information Act requests. 
Section IV. Data Concerns. B. Role of Indigenous Knowledge 
•
A final rule must make it clear within the rule itself the importance of TEK in the 
WQS processes. 
•
States must show how information from tribes, including TEK, was incorporated 
into their decision-making. 
•
When facing conflicting information from TEK and western scientific data, EPA 
must err on the side of protecting and restoring resources, as contemplated in the 
CWA itself. 
Section V. Lack of Clear Criteria 
•
States should be required to consider available data arid information that includes 
tribally produced historical data about resource abundance and location, as well as 
historical and current tribal uses of resources. 
•
When analyzing data and making decisions, the extent to which the tribal reserved 
rights have already been diminished, as well as the length of time rights holders 
were prevented from exercising their reserved rights, should be taken into 
consideration. 
•
Suppression rnust include both a consumption component and a location 
component. For example, there are lakes in the ceded territory that cannot be 
accessed due to land ownership pattems. Unsuppressed use would imply that theses 
lake should be protected just as lakes with current tribal use. 
•
Antidegradation provisions rnust apply broadly to habitat types within the areas in 
which tribal reserved rights exist, as well as specific geographic locations (i.e., lakes 
or streams) as defined by the rights holders. 

NTWC key recommendations from their letter dated March 6th 2023: 
Section 131.6 (Minimum Requirements for WQS Submission)  
"NTWC suggests EPA consider developing or at least suggesting processes for these state-
tribe exchanges. If they are not productive, tribes will renew their concerns with EPA during 
consultation under § 131.9(b). As noted below, EPA-tribal consultation is important and should 
be retained. At that point in time, however, the state will have already selected criteria and devoted 
resources to supporting it, which implicitly puts the burden on the tribe to show the criteria are 
inadequate rather than the state showing they are adequate. That may also inadvertently set the 
state and tribe up for unnecessary conflict when the spirit of the requirement is clearly to foster 
respectful and genuine engagement. (page 5)" 
"We [NTWC] recommend explicitly requiring that state submissions explain the 
procedures used to identify and engage right holders, describe any substantive suggestions the 
right holders made that the state did not adopt, and explain the state's justifications for not adopting 
them. (Section 131.6 (page 6)" 
In regards to providing information to the State: "The NTWC and tribal leaders 
recommend that the request for culturally sensitive information must occur under strict 
confidential procedures. Section 131.6 (g) should provide that right holders may request certain 
information about tribal reserved rights to be kept confidential, in which the state and EPA rnust 
honor that request. (page 6)" 
"Our [NTWC] third recommendation is for this provision to recognize explicitly 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK) as one method for developing standards protecting 
tribal reserved rights uses. (page 6)" 
"The NTWC recommends that 131.6 (g) identify language that any shared information or 
data gathered by the tribe will not be used in a manner that limits or challenges their reserved right 
where they apply. (page 6)" 
"The NTWC urges EPA to compensate tribes for the costs they accrue in conducting legal 
review, data cornpilation and analysis for requested reserved right information. EPA can consider 
using its discretionary funding to compensate tribes for their information sharing efforts. (page 6)" 
S ection •131 .9(b)  
"The NTWC recommends the proposed rule identify a dispute resolution process, which 
rights holders can request to meet directly with the EPA Administrator to take steps that address 
those disputes. Additionally, the NTWC recommends that when necessary, the EPA utilize their 
Conflict Prevention and Resolution Center to mediate and resolve disputes. (Page 9)" 
S ection 131.9(c)  
"However, NTWC maintains that to protect tribal reserved rights, the antidegradation 
•requirements referenced in § 131.9(c)(3) should be required in addition to the designated uses 
and water quality criteria required in § 131.9(c)(1)-(2), not instead of those requirernents. In 
other words, the regulatory text should say "and" instead of "and/or" when listing the 
requirements in § 131.9(c). (page 10)" 

Section 131.20 (State Review and Revision of WQS)  
"The NTWC recommends EPA adopt a process that requires states to contact all tribes 
with treaty protected rights within their borders, rneet with thern separately from the general 
public hearing provided in § 131.20, and take their input into account when reviewing WQS. In 
addition, EPA should require states to notify both the tribe or tribes affected and EPA if the state 
disagrees with the tribe's claim to a reserved right in a particular resource. (page 10)" 
Sincerely, 
jcthnfjohnson Sr. 
President 
Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0269 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
6100 Neil Road, Suite 500 
Reno, Nevada 89511-1159 
775.688.3000 
woodburnanclwedge.com 
I 
1 
rWOODBURN 
March 6, 2023 
Gordon H. DePaoli 
E-MAIL: gdepaoli@woodburnandwedge.com 
DIRECT DIAL: (775) 688-3010 
Via Federal eRulemaking Portal: 
https://www.regulations.gov 
Water Docket, Environmental Protection Agency 
Mail Code 2822 T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue N.W. 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
Attn: Docket ID No. - EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
Re: 
Docket ID No. - EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 — Water Quality Standards 
Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights 
Dear Sir or Madam: 
The Walker River Irrigation District (the "District") respectfully submits these comments 
on the proposed revisions to 40 CFR, Part 131, concerning Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, published in the Federal Register on December 5, 
2022 (Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791), 87 Fed. Reg. No. 232, by the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency ("EPA"). 
The District was formed on April 14, 1919, pursuant to Nevada's Irrigation District Act, 
which was enacted in that year. There are approximately 246,000 acres of land within the District 
boundaries. All of these lands are in Lyon County, Nevada. There are approximately 80,041 water 
right acres in the District along the East Walker River and in Smith and Mason Valleys in Nevada. 
A judicial decree entered by the United States District Court for the District of Nevada in 1936 
and amended in 1940, adjudicates water rights for those lands and for lands upstream in California. 
It also adjudicates water rights for the United States of America for the Walker River Indian 
Reservation which is downstream from the lands within the District. 
The Walker River is a non-navigable interstate stream, consisting of the East Walker, West 
Walker and Walker Rivers. United States v. Walker River Irrig. Dist., 104 F.2d 334 (9th Cir. 
1939). The East and West Walker Rivers rise high on the eastern slope of the Sierra Nevada in 
California. The West Walker flows into Antelope Valley, located mostly in California, and then 
into Smith and Mason Valleys in Nevada. The principal streams forming the East Walker combine 
in Bridgeport Meadows in California. From there, the East Walker flows into Mason Valley, 
where it unites with the West Walker to form the Walker River. The Walker River leaves Mason 
Valley, and flows into and through the Walker River Indian Reservation and into Walker Lake. 

A •WOODBURN 
1 
I 
Water Docket, Environmental Protection Agency 
March 6, 2023 
Page 2 of 3 
The Walker River Indian Reservation was set aside in 1859 and was later confirmed by 
executive order. The Walker River Decree confirms an implied federal reserved right for the 
Reservation of 26.25 CFS to irrigate 2100 acres of land with an 1859 priority. The right is based 
upon Winters v. United States, 207 U.S. 564 (1908). 
The State of Nevada has established standards of water quality for the Walker River to the 
exterior border of the Reservation (NAC 445A.1906) and from the exterior border of the 
Reservation to Walker Lake (NAC 445A.1908). The Walker River Tribe was granted treatment as 
a State on February 29, 2016. The Tribe proposed water quality standards for the Reservation in 
January of 2019. However, it does not appear that EPA has ever approved those standards. 
The District questions whether the EPA has the authority to enact the proposed rule under 
the Clean Water Act. The EPA has not referenced any specific provision which would authorize 
it. Moreover, the proposed rule places States, and perhaps EPA itself, in the position of having to 
interpret treaties, executive orders and other documents related to the establishment of Indian 
Reservations. That involves an extremely complicated body of law which is often the subject of 
lengthy and complex litigation. 
In addition to the issue of EPA's authority to enact the proposed regulation, the proposed 
definition of "tribal reserved rights" is extremely broad and unhelpful. For example, the District is 
confused by exactly how the proposed definition of "tribal reserved rights" applies with respect to 
the Walker River and the Walker River Indian Reservation. The background portion of the 
proposal in Part III B., states that "tribal reserved rights, as defined in this proposed rulemaking, 
generally do not address the quantification of Winter 's rights." While the District understands why 
the proposed rule could not address quantification of such rights, the proposed rule is not clear on 
whether a Winter 's right constitutes an "aquatic resource" held by the Tribe, which must be 
protected by State water quality standards. In this situation, where the Walker River Tribe's 
"Winter 's right" is for purposes of irrigation, State water quality standards which protect water 
quality sufficient for the irrigation use of the water should satisfy what is intended by the proposed 
rulemaking. 
Although water in the River on the Reservation no doubt does benefit "aquatic dependent 
resources," there is nothing that suggests that, as the Reservation now exists, those resources were 
reserved for the Tribe in the same manner as some of the examples in the background section 
concerning rights reserved to tribes to fish in their usual and accustomed places. Moreover, with 
respect to this portion of the Walker River, the issue of protection of aquatic dependent resources 
is one of water quantity not water quality. The Clean Water Act and regulations promulgated 
under it cannot be used as a basis for increasing the quantity of water reserved for a reservation. 

I 
I 
WOODBURN 
Water Docket, Environmental Protection Agency 
March 6, 2023 
Page 3 of 3 
For the foregoing reasons, the District respectfully requests that the EPA withdraw the 
proposal. 
WOODBURN AND WEDGE 
Gordon H. DePaoli 
Attorneys for the Walker River Irrigation District 
cc: Walker River Irrigation District

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0242 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Via Regulations.gov 
 
March 6, 2023 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Office of Water Docket 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions To Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 
Docket Number EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
The Minnesota Center for Environmental Advocacy (“MCEA”) is encouraged to see the 
Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) take steps to ensure that state water quality standards 
(“WQS”) protect tribal rights under the Clean Water Act (“CWA” or “the Act”). As an 
environmental advocacy organization that has engaged in Minnesota water-quality issues since 
1974, we are confident that this rulemaking is well within EPA’s authority and that the rules will 
benefit all Minnesotans by upholding important obligations between the state and Native nations. 
We encourage EPA to aid implementation by making state information-gathering expectations 
explicit in the rules. As to the substantive provisions of the proposed rules, we defer to tribal 
expertise and urge EPA to engage in meaningful tribal consultation. 
 
1. 
The Clean Water Act and federal Indian law provide ample authority for this 
rulemaking.  
 
This rulemaking will be an important tool to uphold EPA’s obligations under the Clean 
Water Act, as well as the federal trust responsibility. Congress enacted the CWA “to restore and 
maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the Nation’s waters,” with an 
emphasis on protecting “fish, shellfish, and wildlife.”1 Protection of downstream waters is an 
important component of EPA’s statutory responsibility.2 Accordingly, EPA has long required 
that WQS protect all downstream uses, including the “most sensitive use.”3 Tribal uses are 
among those impacted uses; yet, tribal rights are not always taken into account.  
 
Longstanding principles of federal Indian law support consideration of these tribal uses in 
CWA implementation. Because tribes are the indigenous sovereigns of the lands (and waters) 
that we now call the United States, federal law has always recognized a unique trust relationship 
 
1 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a).  
2 See id. § 1341.  
3 40 C.F.R. § 131.11(a)(1). 

2 
 
between the federal government and tribes. Substantively, the trust responsibility requires federal 
agencies to protect tribal resources and to ensure that tribal rights are protected from state 
intrusion—whether those rights are recognized by treaty or other provisions of federal law.4 
Procedurally, it requires federal agencies to initiate meaningful tribal consultation when a federal 
action may affect tribal resources.5 
 
This rulemaking will rightfully implement the CWA’s mandates in accordance with the 
federal trust responsibility. Protecting tribal rights “unsuppressed by [existing] water quality”6 is 
consistent with federal law governing tribal reserved rights, as well Congress’s directive to 
“restore . . . the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of the Nation’s waters.”7 Further, 
requiring states to account for tribal rights downstream will help the states and EPA verify that 
all downstream uses are in fact protected, including the “most sensitive use.”8 And codification 
of EPA’s duty to consult with tribes will help ensure fulfillment of this procedural component of 
the trust responsibility.9 
 
Finally, this rulemaking recognizes that tribal rights are not always enshrined in 
treaties.10 We are glad to see EPA protect the rights of non-treaty tribes and tribes whose treaties 
have been unjustly abrogated, as these tribes nonetheless may hold federal rights to water-
dependent resources. We encourage EPA to protect the full spectrum of tribal rights as allowed 
by law.  
 
2. 
This rulemaking benefits not only tribes, but the State of Minnesota. 
 
Given the importance of protecting downstream tribal rights, all three sovereigns—
federal, state, and tribal—will benefit from rules setting forth their respective roles and 
responsibilities. When it comes to the state’s role, Minnesota citizens have called on state 
agencies to consider tribal rights in decisionmaking. Leaders are beginning to hear that call. In 
2019, Governor Tim Walz signed an executive order recognizing tribal sovereignty and directing 
agencies to improve coordination with tribes.11 In 2021, the Minnesota Legislature similarly 
 
4 Colette Routel & Jeffrey Holth, Toward Genuine Tribal Consultation in the 21st Century, 46 U. 
Mich. J.L. Reform 417, 431-22 (2013). See also New Mexico v. Mescalero Apache Tribe, 462 
U.S. 324, 340-41 (1983) (rejecting state interference with tribal-federal regulation of reservation 
resources); Antoine v. Washington, 420 U.S. 194, 205 (1975) (“State qualification of [treaty] 
rights is . . . precluded by force of the Supremacy Clause . . . .”). 
5 Routel & Holth, supra, at 435-36. 
6 Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions To Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 
74361, 74378 (Dec. 5, 2022) (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(1)). 
7 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a) (emphasis added). 
8 40 C.F.R. § 131.11(a)(1). 
9 87 Fed. Reg. at 74378 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(b)). 
10 Id. (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.3(r)). 
11 Gov. Tim Walz, Affirming the Government to Government Relationship between the State of 
Minnesota and Minnesota Tribal Nations, Exec. Order No. 19-24 (Apr. 4, 2019). 

3 
 
recognized “the unique status of Minnesota Tribes” and encouraged state agencies to engage in 
“timely and meaningful consultation.”12 But there remain gaps in implementation.13  
 
This rulemaking will help Minnesota agencies ensure compliance with already-existing 
state standards (as well as the federal Clean Water Act) by mandating consideration of tribal 
rights in water-quality rulemaking.14 And requiring states consider tribal rights as part of 
triennial review15 will provide a helpful organizing framework for the state to begin addressing 
current gaps in WQS. We fully support adding these requirements to the EPA rules.  
 
3. 
The rules should explicitly direct states to engage in meaningful consultation as part 
of the information-gathering process. 
 
The proposed rules rightfully require states to provide EPA with information about the 
impact of proposed WQS on tribal rights. However, the rules could be rephrased to more clearly 
express EPA’s expectations of states in gathering this information. As proposed, the rules would 
require states to provide information “as informed by the right holders”16 and to protect rights 
“to the extent supported by available data and information.”17 These passive phrases do not 
clearly place the burden on the states to seek out this information.18 Instead, the only express 
consultation provision relates to EPA.19 State agencies could mistakenly interpret this phrasing 
to mean that it is up to EPA, not the states, to initiate consultation. 
 
EPA’s notice of this rulemaking provides some guidance that may be helpful to 
incorporate into the rules, especially if paired with active phrasing that makes it clear which 
actor(s) should be taking these steps: 
 
A first step in obtaining this information should be engagement with potential 
right holders. Accordingly, when WQS are being evaluated or revised, early 
engagement with federally recognized tribes within the relevant state as well as 
tribes outside the state that exercise resource rights within that state, can help EPA 
and states determine if there are reserved rights, the scope of those rights, and 
whether and how they should be applied in the WQS context.20  
 
 
12 2021 Minn. Laws ch. 31, art. 2, § 16 (codified at Minn. Stat. § 10.65, subd. 1). 
13 See University of Minnesota, What Makes State-Tribal Consultation Meaningful? (2020), 
available at https://manoominpsin.umn.edu/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/Manoomin-Fact-Sheet-
Spread.pdf. 
14 87 Fed. Reg. at 74378 (proposed 40 C.F.R. §§ 131.6(g), 131.9). 
15 Id. at 74378-79 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.20(a)). 
16 Id. at 74378 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.6(g)(1)). 
17 Id. (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(b)). 
18 The proposed language in 40 C.F.R. § 131.20(a) (triennial review) is helpful in this regard. 
However, at the time of triennial review process, it may not yet be clear that tribal rights are 
potentially affected. 
19 87 Fed. Reg. at 74378 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(b)). 
20 Id. at 74367. 

4 
 
Because regulators may not always review the rulemaking notice, these expectations 
would be clearer if set forth in the rules. Specifically, the rules should ensure understanding that 
the responsibility lies with the state, as well as EPA, to seek this information. Accordingly, we 
respectfully recommend that the rules expressly direct state agencies to seek information on 
potentially impacted tribal rights early in the process of developing proposed water quality 
standards.21 This could be accomplished with a rule that uses active phrasing such as: “When 
evaluating or revising WQS, the state’s first step in obtaining this information should be early 
engagement with potential rights holders to obtain information regarding the nature of reserved 
rights and where such rights may apply. . . .”  
 
Conclusion 
 
 
MCEA applauds EPA’s initiative to implement federal requirements into clear rules, 
ensuring that all parties understand existing obligations to protect downstream tribal rights. We 
encourage EPA to engage in meaningful consultation throughout this rulemaking process, 
reaching out to tribes through appropriate channels and in a manner that is respectful of the 
government-to-government relationship between tribes and the United States. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
/s/ Melissa Lorentz    
Melissa Lorentz, Staff Attorney 
Nadia Alsadi, Water Policy Associate 
Minnesota Center for Environmental Advocacy 
1919 University Avenue West, Suite 515 
Saint Paul, MN 55104 
mlorentz@mncenter.org 
nalsadi@mncenter.org 
 
 
21 This would be consistent with longstanding EPA policy. EPA, Policy for the Administration of 
Environmental Programs on Indian Reservations, at 3 (1984) (“Sound environmental planning 
and management require the cooperation and mutual consideration of neighboring governments, 
whether those governments be neighboring States, Tribes, or local units of government. 
Accordingly, EPA will encourage early communication and cooperation among Tribes, States 
and local governments.”).

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0303 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0265 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
~ 
-:, 
ff 
~ 
11
1:,NTOF}"-'Y. 
United States Department of the Interior 
<1 
~ 
::, 
,, 
'II'/ 
~~ 
CH 3. 
IN Rl:l'LY REFER TO 
A vi S. Garbow 
General Counsel 
OFFICE OF THE SOLICITOR 
\Vashi11g1011, 
D.C. 202-10 
JAN 
3 o 2015 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave NW 
Washjngton, D.C. 20460 
Re: Maine's WQS and Tribal Fishing Rights of Maine Tribes 
Dear Mr. Garbow: 
The State of Maine has submitted proposals to the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) to implement Water Quality Standards (WQS) within waters set aside for federally 
recognized tribes under applicable state and Federal law for uses including sustenance 
fishing (hereinafter described as Maine Indian Waters). 1 To assist in your review of 
Maine's proposals, you have asked for the Department of the Interior's views regarding 
tribal fishing rights in Maine and particularly the relationship between tribal fishing rights 
and water quality. We have reviewed applicable law and, for the reasons explained 
below, conclude that all four of the Maine tribes-the 
Penobscot Nation, the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe, the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, and the Aroostook Band of 
Micmacs-have 
federally-protected tribal fishing rights. These fishing rights should be 
taken into account in evaluating the adequacy of WQS in Maine. 
1. Overview of Tribal Fishing Rights in Maine Indian Waters 
As you are well aware, the four federally recognized Indian tribes in the State of Maine 
are subject to a unique statutory framework established by the state-law Act to Implement 
the Maine Indian Claims Settlement ("Maine Implementing Act"), 2 the state-law Micmac 
Settlement Act,3 the federal Maine Indian Claims Settlement Act ("MICSA"), 4 and the 
1 We note that the exact boundaries of at least some Indian lands and territories in Maine remain in dispute. 
For example, the United States has intervened in a lawsuit filed by the Penobscot Nation against Maine 
claiming that the Penobscot Reservation includes waters in the Main Stem of the Penobscot River. See 
Order on Pending Motions in Penobscot Nation v. Mills, I: 12-cv-00254-GZS (D. Maine Feb. 4, 2014) 
(granting US motion to intervene). It is beyond the scope of this letter to precisely identify all Maine 
Indian Waters. The location of Maine Indian Waters for each Tribe would have to be defined based on all 
applicable law, including statutory language, applicable property law doctrine, and lands reserved by treaty 
and retained by the tribes pursuant to statute. We do not elaborate here on the question of whether the 
Maine tribes have additional fishing rights outside of Indian lands and territories. 
2 30 M.R.S. §§ 6201 et seq. 
3 30 M.R.S. §§ 720 I et seq. 
4 25 U.S.C. §§ 1721 et seq. 

federal Aroostook Band of Micmacs Settlement Act5 ( collectively the "Settlement 
Acts").6 
There is no dispute that the four Maine tribes have historically engaged in fishing in 
Maine waters and that fishing is an important cultural and economic activity for Maine 
tribal members. 7 Because of differences in their history and applicable statutory 
language, the fishing rights of the two Southern Tribes-the Passamaquoddy Tribe and 
the Penobscot Indian Nation-
derive from different legal sources than the fishing rights 
of the Northern Tribes-the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians and the Aroostook Band 
of Micmacs. But all Maine tribes possess fishing rights that EPA should consider when 
analyzing proposed water quality standards in Maine. 
The fishing rights of the Passamaquoddy Tribe and Penobscot Indian Nation in their 
Reservation waters8 are expressly reserved9 fishing rights: the Maine Implementing Act 
5 P.L. 102-171, 105 Stat. 1143 (1991). 
6 In MICSA, Congress formally confirmed the federal recognition of the Penobscot Nation, the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe and the Houlton Band ofMaliseet Indians. 25 U.S.C. § 1725(i). Federal recognition 
was extended to the Aroostook Band ofMicmacs eleven years later with the enactment of P.L. 102-171 
(Sec. 6(a)), so now these four Maine tribes are recognized as eligible for the rights and benefits oflndian 
tribal status. See generally 25 U.S.C. § 479a-l(a) (providing for listing offederally recognized tribes that 
are all entitled to "services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians"). 
7 Notably, several standalone provisions in Maine law recognize and arguably encourage the continuing 
centrality of fishing to the traditions and health of Maine tribes. First, the State of Maine recognizes and 
facilitates fishing as a central part of tribal culture by issuing permits to tribal members to fish in Maine 
waters at no cost. 12 M.R.S. § 10853(8). Second, the State has enacted legislation providing for special 
treatment of tribal members engaged in fishing for marine organisms, exempting them from many state 
permitting requirements and providing a broad exemption for many tribal sustenance and ceremonial uses. 
12 M.R.S. § 6302-A. Concerns of the tribes with the process by which this language was adopted and 
objections to the definition of sustenance are explained in a recent report by the Maine Tribal-State 
Commission. Me. Indian Tribal-State Comm'n, Assessment of the Intergovernmental Saltwater Fisheries 
Conflict between Passamaquoddy and the State of Maine (June 17, 2014), available at 
http://www.mitsc.orgldocuments/148_2014-10-2MITSCbook-WEB.pdf ("Commission Saltwater Fisheries 
Report"). 
8 30 M.R.S. § 6203(5) (defining Passamaquoddy Indian Reservation as ''those lands reserved to the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe by agreement with the State of Massachusetts dated September 19, 1794" except for 
lands transferred by the Tribe after these treaties but before enactment of the Maine Implementing Act, and 
with certain additional specifications); § 6203(8) (defining Penobscot Indian Reservation as ''the islands in 
the Penobscot River reserved to the Penobscot Nation by agreement with the States of Massachusetts and 
Maine" except for islands transferred by the Tribe after these treaties but before the enactment of the Maine 
Implementing Act and with the addition of other specifically enumerated parcels). Legislative history 
confirms that the Reservations include riparian and littoral rights under State law or treaties: 
The boundaries of the Reservations are limited to those areas described in the bill, but 
include any riparian or littoral rights expressly reserved by the original treaties with 
Massachusetts or by operation of state law. 
State of Maine, Maine legislature, Joint Select Committee on the Indian Land Claims, Report of 
the Joint Select Committee on Indian Land Claims Relating to LD 2037 "An Act to provide for 
Implementation of the Settlement of Claims by Indians in the State of Maine and to Create the 
Passamaquoddy Indian Territory and Penobscot Indian Territory," at p. 3, para. 14. 
9 A reserved right is a right that has been retained since aboriginal times. Section 6207(4)'s sustenance 
fishing right applies within these Reservations retained by the Southern Tribes first under treaties and now 
under the Settlement Acts, see supra note 8, since aboriginal times. Congress used an apt phrase that 
2 

acknowledges the right of Penobscot Nation and Passamaquoddy members to "take 
fish ... for their individual sustenance" within their reservations free of state regulation. 10 
These statutorily-acknowledged fishing rights are rooted in treaty guarantees 11 that were 
upheld through the Settlement Acts. The Passamaquoddy Tribe's 1794 treaty with the 
State of Massachusetts explicitly reserves a Passamaquoddy fishing right in the St. Croix 
River (then known as the Schoodic River): the treaty guarantees "to said Indians the 
privilege of fishing on both branches of the river Schoodic without hindrance or 
molestation." 12 The Penobscot treaties of 1818 (with Massachusetts) and 1820 (with 
Maine) do not expressly mention fishing rights because they did not cede the Penobscot 
River, explicitly retaining islands and granting to non-members only the right to "pass 
and repass" the River. The Penobscot Nation had historically relied on fishing, and the 
islands mentioned in the Treaty would have been of little value if they were not 
accompanied by fishing grounds. 13 
The Maine Implementing Act further provides for tribal sustenance fishing in certain 
ponds on lands located outside the Southern Tribes' reservations, but held in trust by the 
United States as part of the Indian territories established under the Settlement Acts. The 
Southern Tribes have exclusive authority to enact ordinances regulating the taking of fish 
on ponds of less than ten acres in their trust lands which "may include special provisions 
for the sustenance of the individual members of the Passamaquoddy Tribe or the 
Penobscot Nation." 14 The Maine Implementing Act also includes special provisions for 
captures the reserved right concept in the legislative history for the Federal Maine Indian Claims Settlement 
Act, characterizing fishing rights as an example of natural resources considered "expressly retained 
sovereign activities." H.R. Rep. No. 96-1353 at p 15 (1980). 
10 This reading is established by language in 30 M.R.S. § 6207(4): 
Notwithstanding any rule or regulation promulgated by the commission or any other law 
of the State, the members of the Passamaquoddy Tribe and the Penobscot Nation may 
take fish, within the boundaries of their respective Indian reservations, for their individual 
sustenance subject to the limitations of subsection 6 [providing for the State to limit tribal 
fishing if necessary to protect the stock of fish]. 
State regulation is allowed only in the case of conservation necessity, as laid out in the Maine 
Implementing Act at 30 M.R.S. § 6207(6). 
11 These treaties were State treaties, negotiated not with the United States but with the Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts; Maine later adopted the responsibility to implement these treaties in its state constitution. 
See Maine Constitution, Art. X, Sec. 5: 
The new State shall, as soon as the necessary arrangements can be made for that purpose, 
assume and perform all the duties and obligations of this Commonwealth, towards the 
Indians within said District of Maine, whether the same arise from treaties, or otherwise. 
Available at http://www.maine.gov/legis/lawlib/const1820.pdf. (Note that per Art. X, Sec. 7, the text 
quoted here is omitted from printed copies of the Maine Constitution, but still remains in force and effect.). 
The Settlement Acts preempt any contrary language in the treaties, but the legislative history discussed in 
supra note 8 explains that expressly reserved riparian rights under the treaties were retained under the 
Settlement Acts. 
12 The text of the treaty is available at http://www.wabanaki.com/l 794_treaty.htm. 
13 See, e.g., Alaska Pacific Fisheries v. U.S., 248 U.S. 78, 86-89 (1918) (holding that where Congress set 
aside lands for the Metlakahtla Indians, a fishing tribe, it impliedly reserved fishing rights in the adjacent 
waters). 
14 30 M.R.S. § 6207( I). 
3 

regulation of certain waters by the Maine Indian Tribal-State Commission. 15 Thus, 
through the Maine Implementing Act, the State has recognized the Southern Tribes' 
sustenance fishing rights within their territories, and the importance of fish to tribal 
members' diet. 
Although the term "sustenance" is not defined in the Settlement Acts, it is reasonable to 
conclude that the term encompasses, at a minimum, the notion of tribal members taking 
fish to nourish and sustain themselves. Moreover, the Indian law canons of construction 
require that ambiguous terms in statutes must be construed "most favorably towards tribal 
interests." 16 Where fishing rights of traditional fishing tribes are concerned, this rule of 
liberal construction applies with special force: one court has held that treaties must be 
construed "in the sense in which they would naturally be understood by the Indians .... 
especially the reference to the right of taking fish." 17 The term "sustenance" in section 
6207(4) of the Maine Implementing Act should thus be construed broadly 18 to 
incorporate at least the right of tribal members to take sufficient fish to nourish and 
sustain them, 19 with no specific quantitative limits other than the conservation necessity 
limit that the statutory language specifically places on the tribal fishing right. 20 When 
interpreting the scope of the Maine tribes' fishing right as the tribes would understand 
them, EPA should consider that the tribes' ability to fish was, and continues to be, 
essential to their livelihood and culture. 
The sources of the fishing rights of Maine's Northern Tribes are different in that they are 
not discussed explicitly in the Settlement Acts. However, express language in a statute or 
15 The Commission is an intergovernmental body made up of members appointed by the Tribes and the 
State. 30 M.R.S. § 6212. 30 M.R.S. § 6207(3) authorizes the Commission to promulgate fishing rules and 
regulations within specified waters on or adjoining the Penobscot Nation's and Passamaquoddy Tribe's 
territories, taking into account the "needs or desires of the tribes to establish fishery practices for the 
sustenance of the tribes or to contribute to the economic independence of the tribes." 
16 Rincon Band of luiseno Mission Indians of Rincon Reservation v. Schwarzenegger, 602 F.3d IO 19, I 032 
(9th Cir. 20 I 0). See also Montana v. Blackfeet Tribe, 471 U.S. 759, 766 ( 1985) ("Statutes are to be 
construed liberally in favor of the Indians, with ambiguous provisions interpreted to their benefit."). The 
Indian canons of construction have been held to apply to interpretation of the Settlement Acts. See infra 
note 48 and accompanying text. 
17 Washington v. Wash. State Commercial Passenger Fishing Vessel Ass'n, 443 U.S. 658,676,678 
(1979). 
18 Tribes have argued that in addition to fishing for individual consumption, the definition of sustenance 
traditionally incorporated two other components: barter and exchange. Commission Saltwater Fisheries 
Report, supra note 7, at p. 22-23 
19 A study prepared for EPA in collaboration with the Maine Tribes discusses what level of fish 
consumption is representative of sustenance fishing in Maine Indian waters. Harper, Barbara and Darren 
Ranco, Wabanaki Traditional Cultural lifeways Exposure Scenario, prepared for EPA in collaboration 
with the Maine Tribes, July 9, 2009, available at http://www.epa.gov/region 1/govt/tribes/pdfs/DITCA.pdf. 
20 This statutory provision establishing a right of the State to regulate in limited situations of conservation 
necessity is consistent with the federal common law rule. See United States v. Oregon, 769 F.2d 1410, 
1416 (9th Cir. 1990) ( describing findings that court must make in order to uphold regulation of treaty rights 
to take fish, including that "States must consider the protection of the treaty right to take fish ... as an 
objective co-equal with the conservation of the fish runs for other uses"); United States v. Washington, 384 
F. Supp. 312, 40 I (W.D. Wash. 1974) ("Neither the Indians nor the non-Indians may fish in a manner so as 
to destroy the resource or to preempt it totally."). 
4 

treaty is not necessary to establish the existence of a tribal fishing right.21 Tribal fishing 
rights are implied through an analysis of the purpose of these land settlements-to 
create 
a permanent land base-and the trust property interests created pursuant to the Acts. As 
described below, these fishing rights are also rooted in state common law on the right of 
riparian owners to fish on their properties in addition to the Settlement Acts and federal 
common law on the importance and durability of tribal fishing rights. 
The fundamental requirement for a fishing right is access to fishable waters, and 
legislative history for the Maine Implementing Act specifically addresses the issue of the 
tribes' access to waters in connection with their trust lands: 
Any lands acquired by purchase or trade may include riparian or littoral 
rights to the extent they are conveyed by the selling party or included by 
general principles of law. 22 
This language allows for riparian rights to attach to the tribal trust lands held by the 
United States for the Northern Tribes, which are acquired by purchase and then put into 
trust.23 In Maine, a right to fish is a right "included by general principles of law" when 
riparian lands are acquired, 24 and this language thus confirms that Maine's legislature 
recognized the right of the Maine tribes to engage in fishing on their reservation and trust 
21 The hunting and fishing rights that were held to survive termination of the Tribe's status as a federally 
recognized tribe in the seminal case Menominee Tribe of Indians v. United States were created by treaty 
language providing that tribal land would be "held as Indian lands are held." 391 U.S. 404, 405-06 (1968). 
See also United States v. Dion, 416 U.S. 734, 738 (1986) (explaining that "[a]s a general rule, Indians enjoy 
exclusive treaty rights to hunt and fish on lands reserved to them, unless such rights were clearly 
relinquished by treaty or have been modified by Congress," and that these rights need not be expressly 
mentioned in the treaty). State regulatory jurisdiction is not incompatible with a tribal fishing right; the 
existence of state laws dealing with tribal fishing in Maine, see supra note 7, reinforces that the State 
acknowledges the importance of tribal fishing rights. Carole E. Goldberg et al., AMERICAN INDIAN LAW: 
NATIVE NATIONS AND THE FEDERAL SYSTEM I 177-78 (6th ed. 2010) ("It is important to see that 
jurisdictional protections supplement rather than displace tribal property rights to hunt and fish."). 
22 State of Maine, Maine legislature, Joint Select Committee on the Indian Land Claims, Report of the Joint 
Select Committee on Indian Land Claims Relating to LD 2037 "An Act to provide for Implementation of 
the Settlement of Claims by Indians in the State of Maine and to Create the Passamaquoddy Indian 
Territory and Penobscot Indian Territory," at p. 3, para. 14. 
23 See 25 U.S.C. § 1724(d)(4) (providing for "land or natural resources to be acquired by the United States 
to be held in trust for the benefit of the Houlton Band"); 30 M.R.S. § 6205-A (providing for acquisition of 
"Houlton Band Trust Land"; P .L. 102-171, 105 Stat. 1143, § 5 (providing for acquisition of" Aroostook 
Band Trust Lands"); 30 M.R.S. § 7202(2) ( defining Aroostook Band Trust Land). 
24 The right of riparian landowners to fish is predicated on both State and federal common law. Based on 
the default Maine property rule, owners of riparian land also own out to the thread, or middle, of most 
streams. Wilson & Son v. Harrisburg, 107 Me. 207, 211 ( 1910) ("With respect to the rights of the riparian 
proprietor in floatable and non-tidal streams, it is the settled law of this State that he owns the bed of the 
river to the middle of the stream and all but the public right of passage."). Riparian property owners have 
the right to fish on their lands. See Answers to Questions Propounded to the Justices of the Supreme 
Judicial Court by the House of Representatives, 118 Me. 503,507 (1919) (noting that "[t]he riparian 
proprietor has the right to take fish from the water over his own land"). 
5 

lands alike when these lands are riparian to fishable waters. On the Northern Tribes' trust 
lands, this right is subject to reasonable State regulation. 25 
Even more importantly, however, the Northern Tribes26 have more than the right of a 
Maine citizen to fish - they have the right to do so on lands set aside and held in trust for 
them. The establishment of trust land is one of the most important functions the United 
States performs for tribes. Trust lands provide a permanent land base, protecting these 
lands against loss,27 and providing territory over which tribes may exercise governmental 
authority, albeit subject to the constraints imposed by the Settlement Acts.28 Trust lands 
also protect and sustain tribal culture and ways of life, including tribal sustenance fishing 
25 The Settlement Acts provide that State law applies to the trust lands of the Northern Tribes. We describe 
this as a right of"reasonable regulation" because the Settlement Acts did not contemplate and should not be 
read to allow State law that is discriminatory against tribes or not consistent with the Settlement Acts, 
including the federal purpose of holding this land base in trust. In section l 725(a) of MICSA, Congress 
approved 30 M.R.S. § 6204 of the Maine Implementing Act regarding the application of state law to Indian 
lands, specifying that Maine civil and criminal law would generally apply to these lands. While conferring 
civil and criminal jurisdiction on the State of Maine over the Northern Tribes' trust lands, nothing in 
section 1725 abrogates federal authority to protect these tribal trust lands. 25 U.S.C. § l 725(a) reads: 
Except as provided in section 1727( e) [ dealing with Indian Child Welfare Act definitions] 
and section 1724( d)( 4) [ regarding acquisition of land and natural resources for the 
Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians] of this title, all Indians, Indian nations, or tribes or 
bands of Indians in the State of Maine, other than the Passamaquoddy Tribe, the 
Penobscot Nation, and their members, and any lands or natural resources owned by any 
such Indian, Indian nation, tribe or band of Indians and any lands or natural resources 
held in trust by the United States, or by any other person or entity, for any such Indian, 
Indian nation, tribe, or band of Indians shall be subject to the civil and criminal 
jurisdiction of the State, the laws of the State, and the civil and criminal jurisdiction of 
the courts of the State, to the same extent as any other person or land therein. 
26 This discussion is aimed at the Northern Tribes, but we note that some of the Southern Tribes' Territories 
include lands held in trust that would have fishing rights based on this same trust land focused analysis. 
Some, but not all, of these lands have fishing rights confirmed through other statutory language, see supra 
notes 14-15 and accompanying text. 
27 For the Houlton Band ofMaliseet Indians, 30 M.R.S. § 6205-A(3) describes restraints against alienation 
of these trust lands. The same language applying to the trust land of the Aroostook Band ofMicmacs,is 
found at 30 M.R.S. § 7204(3). With respect to the Micmacs, legislative history is even plainer that 
Congress intended the trust lands to provide a land base for subsistence purposes: "The ancestors of the 
Aroostook Micmac made a living as migratory hunters, trappers, fishers and gatherers until the 19th 
century .... Today, without a tribal subsistence base of their own, most Micmacs in Northern Maine 
occupy a niche at the lowest level of the social order." S. Rep. No. 102-136 at 5, 9 (1991) (quoting 
testimony of Dr. Harold E.L. Prins). 
28 Even for the Northern Tribes, the Maine Implementing Act recognizes that the tribes may retain certain 
aspects of governmental authority over tribal members. For example, 30 M.R.S. §6209-C( I )(a) provides: 
The Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians has the right to exercise exclusive jurisdiction, 
separate and distinct from the State, over ... [ c ]riminal offenses for which the maximum 
potential term of imprisonment does not exceed one year and the maximum potential fine 
does not exceed $5,000 and that are committed on the Houlton Band Jurisdiction Land by 
a member of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians, except when committed against a 
person who is not a member of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians or against the 
property of a person who is not a member of the Houlton Band of Maliseet Indians. 
6 

practices, which fosters tribal self-determination. 29 The legislative history for MICSA 
supports the view that one of Con~ress' s purposes in providing Maine tribes with a land 
base was to preserve their culture. 0 The connection between fishing rights and land 
ownership is particularly emphasized in the Settlement Acts: the Maine Implementing 
Act defines the "land or other natural resources" to be purchased with federal funds and 
placed into trust as "any real property or other natural resources, or any interest in or right 
involving any real property or other natural resources, including, but without limitation, 
minerals and mineral rights, timber and timber rights, water and water rights and hunting 
and fishing rights." 31 The exercise of these fishing rights by Tribes is fully consistent 
with the Settlement Acts. 32 
In sum, the Federal Government as the owner of the trust lands for the benefit of the 
Tribes has a substantial interest in providing all Maine tribes, including the Northern 
Tribes, with a functional land base that ensures the continuation of their sustenance 
practices and cultural activities.33 
2. Tribal Fishing Rights Include the Subsidiary Right to Sufficient Water Quality 
to Render the Rights Meaningful. 
In Maine, EPA must determine how tribal fishing rights intersect with EPA' s authority 
under the Clean Water Act to approve or disapprove State WQS. We are not aware of 
any case law addressing an identical situation to the one raised by Maine's proposed 
WQS. However, Federal courts have acknowledged the importance of permanent, 
enforceable fishing rights for tribes and have interpreted these rights expansively. 
Tribal fishing rights encompass subsidiary rights that are not explicitly included in treaty 
or statutory language but are nonetheless necessary to render them meaningful. For 
example, in the 1905 case United States v. Winans, the Supreme Court held that a tribe 
must be allowed to cross private property to access traditional fishing grounds. 34 
29 See Final Rule, Acquisitions: Appeals of Land Acquisition Decisions, 78 Fed. Reg. 67928, 67929 
(November 13, 2013) (noting in Background section that taking land into trust serves the "goals of 
protecting and restoring tribal homelands and promoting tribal self-determination" and "reaches the core of 
the Federal trust responsibility"). 
30 Sen. Rep. No. 96-957, at 17 ("Nothing in the settlement provides for acculturation, nor is it the intent of 
Congress to disturb the cultural integrity of the Indian people of Maine."). Several of the Maine tribes 
submitted comments to the EPA about Maine's WQS describing the centrality of fishing to their cultures. 
31 30 M.R.S. § 6203(3) (Emphasis added). MICSA includes this definition almost verbatim at 25 U.S.C. § 
1722(b). 25 U.S.C. § 1724(d) authorizes the Secretary to "expend ... the land acquisition fund for the 
purpose of acquiring land or natural resources for the .... Houlton Band ofMaliseet Indians." Emphasis 
added. Section S(a) ofthe Aroostook Band ofMicmacs Settlement Act, P.L. 102-171, provides similarly 
that the Secretary is authorized ''to expend ... the Land Acquisition Fund for the purposes of acquiring 
land or natural resources for the Band" and defines natural resources to include fishing rights at section 3( 4 ). 
32 Recognizing that Maine tribes have a tribal fishing right would not impinge upon Maine's right to 
regulate such a fishing right. The existence of a tribal fishing right does not affect or preempt Maine's 
regulatory jurisdiction as described in 25 U.S.C. § l 725(h). 
33 See supra note 30 and accompanying text. 
34 198 U.S. 371,384 (1905). 
7 

Similarly in Kittitas Reclamation District v. Sunnyside Valley Irrigation District, the 
Ninth Circuit held that a tribe's fishing right could be protected by enioining water 
withdrawals that would destroy salmon eggs before they could hatch. 5 In Grand 
Traverse Band of Ottawa and Chippewa Indians v. Director, Michigan Department of 
Natural Resources, the Sixth Circuit found that the treaty right to fish commercially in 
the Great Lakes includes a right to temporary mooring of treaty fishing vessels at 
municipal marinas because without such mooring the Indians could not fish 
commercially.36 While the issues presented by diminished water quality in Maine are 
different from the issues presented by inadequate access to fishing places or the need to 
protect fish populations, the result for tribes if water quality in Maine Indian Waters is 
not protected is the same: Indian tribes will not be able to fish for their sustenance 
healthfully. 
The rules in the cases identified above are all variations on the fundamental holding of 
Washington v. Washington State Commercial Passenger Fishing Vessel Association that 
tribes with reserved fishing rights are entitled to something more tangible then "merely 
the chance ... occasionally to dip their nets into the territorial waters." 37 The holding of 
Washington, while specific to the treaty language at issue in that case, is consistent with 
similar holdings from other courts examining the question of whether a tribal fishing 
right implicitly contains within it the right to additional protections to render the fishing 
right meaningful. For example, in holding that a Tribe's hunting and fishing rights 
persisted, the Minnesota Supreme Court explained that "[c]ertainly, it would be 
incongruous to construe the treaty as denying the Indians their very means of existence 
while purporting to grant them a home. "38 
In the context of water quantity, courts have recognized that tribal fishing rights include 
the subsidiary right to water flow sufficient to maintain fish health and reproduction in 
order to effectuate the fishing right. In United States v. Adair, the Ninth Circuit held that 
the tribe's fishing right implicitly reserved sufficient waters to "secure to the Tribe a 
continuation of its traditional ... fishing lifestyle. "39 The logic that supports the tribe's 
right to water quantity adequate to support a lifestyle based on fishing in Adair supports a 
conclusion that EPA should take tribal fishing rights into account when reviewing 
Maine's water quality standards. If water quality diminishes to the point where the fish 
are no longer safe to eat or able to reproduce, tribal fishing rights will suffer a diminution 
just as surely as they suffer from inadequate quantity of water to support fish. 40 
35 763 F.2d 1032, 1034-35 (9th Cir. 1985). 
36 141 F.3d 635, 639-40 (6th Cir. 1989). 
37 443 U.S. 658, 679 (1979). 
38 Minnesota v. Clark, 282 N.W.2d 902,909 (Minn. 1979). 
39 723 F.2d 1394, 1409-10 (9th Cir. 1983). See also Colville Confederated Tribes v. Walton, 641 F.2d 42, 
4 7-48 (9th Cir. 1981) (implying reservation of water to preserve tribe's replacement fishing grounds); 
Winters v. United States, 207 U.S. 564, 576 ( 1908) ( express reservation of land for reservation impliedly 
reserved sufficient water from the river to fulfill the purposes of the reservation); Arizona v. California, 373 
U.S. 546, 598-601 (1963) (creation ofreservation implied intent to reserve sufficient water to satisfy 
£resent and future needs). 
0 The leading federal Indian law treatise explains: 
8 

Ongoing litigation in Washington State involving questions about the extent to which 
tribal fishing rights encompass associated rights to protection for fish habitat also informs 
our analysis.41 The tribes and the United States have argued that tribal fishing rights 
impose a duty on the state of Washington to refrain from building or maintaining road 
culverts that directly block fish passage both to and from breeding areas and therefore 
significantly and directly kill fish, diminish fish populations, and diminish habitat.42 In 
2013, the court adopted this analysis, concluding that the tribes' treaty based fishing right 
had been "impermissibly infringed" through the construction and operation of culverts 
that "has reduced the quantity of quality of salmon habitat, prevented access to spawning 
grounds, reduced salmon production ... and diminished the number of salmon available 
for harvest. ,,4 3 The court issued a permanent injunction forcing the State to renovate its 
culvert system.44 The decision is currently on appeal, but the district court's reasoning is 
consistent with the view that tribal fishing rights can be protected under the Clean Water 
Act. 
When diminished water quality has hindered tribal uses of water outside the fishing 
context, courts have held for tribes and found that a right to put water to use for a 
particular purpose must include a subsidiary right to water quality sufficient to permit the 
protected water use to continue. In an Arizona case, United States v. Gila Valley 
Irrigation District, farmers with a more junior right whose properties were located 
upstream from a reservation were required to take steps to decrease the salinity of the 
tribe's water so that "the Tribe receives water sufficient for cultivating moderately salt-
sensitive crops. "45 Other courts have noted that in some situations protecting water 
Fulfilling the purposes of Indian reservations depends on the tribes receiving water of 
adequate quality as well as sufficient quantity ..... 
[H]abitat protection is an integral 
component of the reserved [fishing] right. In order to protect the fishery habitat, tribes 
should have a right not only to a sufficient amount of water, but also to water that is of 
adequate quality. 
COHEN'S HANDBOOK 
OF FEDERAL INDIAN LAW§ 19.03[9], at 1236 (Nell Jessup Newton ed., 2012) 
(footnotes and citations omitted). 
41 The United States District Court for the Western District of Washington court held that several 
Washington State tribes' treaty fishing rights "implicitly incorporated the right to have the fishery habitat 
protected from manmade despoliation." United States v. Washington, 506 F. Supp. 187,203 (W.D. Wash. 
1980) (Phase II). The court explained that ''the existence of an environmentally-acceptable habitat is 
essential to the survival of the fish, without which the expressly-reserved right to take fish would be 
meaningless and valueless." Id. at 205. That decision was vacated on procedural grounds. United States v. 
Washington, 759 F.2d 1353, 1357 (9th Cir. 1985) (en bane) (requiring plaintiffs to allege specific 
environmental harms before any declaratory judgment could issue, noting that "[i]t serves neither the needs 
of the parties ... nor the interests of the public for the judiciary to employ the declaratory judgment 
f rocedure to announce legal rules imprecise in definition and uncertain in dimension"). 
2 In United States v. Washington, 2007 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 61850, 37-38 (W.D. Wash. Aug. 22, 2007), the 
district court held in favor of the federal and tribal plaintiffs. 
43 United States v. Washington, 2013 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 48850, 75 (W.D. Wash. 2013). 
44 Id. at 78-79. 
45 920 F. Supp. 1444, 1454-56 (D. Ariz. 1996), aff'd, 117 F. 3d425 (9th Cir. 1997). 
9 

quality is fundamental to the protection of tribal rights to self-determination. 46 Given the 
importance of fishing to Maine tribes, protection of water quality sufficient to enable the 
tribes to continue to fish and to consume the fish they are able to catch is comparable to 
protecting water quality to allow the tribe in the Gila Valley case to continue to grow 
crops. 
In summary, fundamental, long-standing tenets of federal Indian law support the 
interpretation of tribal fishing rights to include the right to sufficient water quality to 
effectuate the fishing right. Case law supports the view that water quality cannot be 
impaired to the point that fish have trouble reproducing without violating a tribal fishing 
right; similarly water quality cannot be diminished to the point that consuming fish 
threatens human health without violating a tribal fishing right. A tribal right to fish 
depends on a subsidiary right to fish populations safe for human consumption. If third 
parties are free to directly and significantly pollute the waters and contaminate available 
fish, thereby making them inedible or edible only in small quantities, the right to fish is 
rendered meaningless. To satisfy a tribal fishing right to continue culturally important 
fishing practices, fish cannot be too contaminated for consumption at sustenance levels. 
3. The Trust Relationship Counsels Protection of Tribal Fishing Rights in Maine 
EPA has already recognized that Maine tribes' fishing rights should be considered in 
regulating water quality in a 2003 decision regarding Maine's authority to issue permits 
under the Clean Water Act.47 As EPA noted in that decision, the First Circuit has held 
that the Indian law canons of construction obliging courts to construe statutes which 
diminish the ''the sovereign rights of Indian tribes ... strictly" apply to the Maine tribes 
and that the requirement that ambiguity be interpreted in favor of tribes is "rooted in the 
unique trust relationship between the United States and Indians. "48 
In its decision, EPA announced that when reviewing proposed permits under the Clean 
Water Act49 it would "require the state to address the tribes' uses [for sustenance fishing] 
consistent with the requirements of the CW A. ,,so EPA' s 2003 analysis of tribal fishing 
rights and federal review authority under the Clean Water Act was cogent and the agency 
should follow through on this policy in reviewing Maine's WQS.51 
46 See Bugenig v. Hoopa Valley Tribe, 229 F .3d 1210, 1222 (9th Cir. 2000) ("[I]t is difficult to imagine how 
serious threats to water quality could not have profound implications for tribal self-government."); City of 
Albuquerque v. Browner, 91 F.3d. 415,423 (10th Cir. 1996) (upholding tribal water quality standards that 
were more stringent than federal standards and observing that the authority to establish such high standards 
"is in accord with powers inherent in Indian tribal sovereignty"). 
47 68 Fed. Reg. 65052, 65068 (Nov. 18, 2003). 
48 Penobscot Nation v. Fellencer, 164 F.3d 706, 709 (I st Cir. 1999) (internal quotation marks omitted). 
49 The EPA specifically cited the provision codified at 33 U.S.C. § 1342(d). 
so 68 Fed. Reg. at 65,068. 
51 The First Circuit, reviewing this EPA decision in Maine v. Johnson, found that EPA's analysis of the 
relationship between fishing rights and water quality was not ripe for consideration. 498 F.3d 37, 48 (1st 
Cir. 2007) ("The current relationship of the United States to [Maine] tribes, and the EPA's continued 
authority under the Clean Water Act to review Maine's exercise of ceded powers, present quite different 

Secretary Jewell has recently reaffirmed the federal trust responsibility to tribes. 
Consistent with the principles of Secretarial Order 3335 on Reaffirmation of the Federal 
Trust Responsibility to Federally Recognized Indian Tribes, federal agencies should 
"[ e ]nsure to the maximum extent possible that trust and restricted fee lands, trust 
resources, and treaty and similarly recognized rights are protected." 52 In addition, 
consultation is a critically important part of the United States' government to government 
relationship with tribes, and the EPA should continue to fully consult with tribes 
regarding decisions that have implications for trust resources, including fishing rights. 53 
4. Conclusion 
The Maine tribes rely on clean water, and in particular, on water of a quality sufficient to 
allow the tribes to engage meaningfully in fishing in Maine Indian Waters. Maine tribes 
rely on fish as a dietary staple and vital component of their cultures, and a diminution in 
their ability to take fish at sustenance levels results in a loss of food as well as a threat to 
their ability to carry on their traditions. 
The Maine tribes have fishing rights connected to the lands set aside for them under 
federal and state statutes. Further, these fishing rights would be rendered meaningless if 
they did not also imply a right to water quality of a sufficient level to keep the fish edible 
so that tribal members can safely take the fish for their sustenance. The right of all four 
tribes to take fish is well-founded under State as well as Federal law as discussed in this 
letter. 
Thank you for your attention to these matters of great importance to the Maine tribes. I 
appreciate the opportunity to submit these views for your consideration. 
Sincerely, 
questions [from the ones decided in the case] .... 
[W]e take no view today as to the ultimate resolution of 
these potential issues."). 
52 Secretarial Order 3335 (August 20, 2014), Sec. 5, Principle 2, available at 
http://www.usbr.gov/native/policy/S0-3335_trustresponsibility_August20l4.pdf. 
53 See generally, Executive Order 1317 5 on Consultation and Coordination with Indian Tribal Governments 
(Nov. 6, 2000). 
11

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0260 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
March 6, 2023 
 
Ms. Jennifer Brundage 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Water 
Standards and Health Protection Division (4305T) 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Submitted via www.regulations.gov  
 
RE:  
WMC Comments on 87 Fed. Reg. 74,361 Water Quality Standards Regulatory 
Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights (Dec. 5, 2022) 
Dear Ms. Brundage, 
 
Wisconsin Manufacturers and Commerce (WMC) appreciates the opportunity to provide written 
comment on U.S. EPA’s proposed revisions to requirements applicable to state water quality 
standards under 40 C.F.R. Part 131. 
WMC is Wisconsin’s combined state chamber of commerce and manufacturers’ association. We 
represent approximately 3,800 member companies of all sizes, and from every sector of the 
economy. Our mission is to make Wisconsin the best state in the country to do business.  
WMC’s members have a specific direct interest in the proposed rulemaking. Wisconsin is a “Great 
Lakes State” under Part 131, and portions of the state are subject to rights reserved under the 
Treaties of 1837, 1842, and 1854.  The State of Wisconsin has established regulations recognizing 
and implementing usufructuary rights reserved under the Treaty of 1837, and implements a 
delegated National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program in areas of the 
state subject to those treaties.  
First and foremost, WMC urges the EPA to withdraw this proposed rule. The proposed rule 
represents an egregious overreach by the U.S. EPA. The agency lacks the authority to promulgate 
the rule, failed to properly consider implementation concerns and the rule’s incredible costs, and 
ignored federalism implications associated with the rulemaking.  
However, if the EPA refuses to withdraw the rule, WMC requests important modifications related to 
the following rule requirements:  
• 
Requirement to adopt additional designated uses and water quality standards to address 
tribal treaty rights. 
• 
Use of the “unsuppressed level” of resource consumption in setting water quality standards. 
• 
Requiring that designated uses be set for wild rice areas that have not supported the 
resource since November 28, 1975. 

 
2 | P a g e  
 
As set forth below, Wisconsin’s existing regulations already address reserved treaty rights, and the 
proposed rule should include a mechanism for U.S. EPA to recognize programs that already achieve 
this requirement (see Section #2 of WMC’s comments). In addition, many waterways in the portions 
of Wisconsin in the Ceded Territory are small streams with a limited carrying capacity, such that the 
proposed evaluation of “unsuppressed levels” of fish consumption at a subsistence level is 
historically inaccurate and unrealistic (see Section #3).  Finally, the proposal to require designation 
of areas for wild rice that have not supported that use since at least November 28, 1975 is contrary 
to U.S. EPA’s existing regulations and should be corrected in the Preamble to the final rule (see 
Section #4).  
 
1. EPA should withdraw the proposed rule 
To begin, the best solution is for the EPA to simply withdraw the proposed rule. The EPA lacks the 
necessary statutory authority to promulgate the rule, and has not properly considered the 
significant implementation questions or substantial costs associated with it. Further, the EPA has 
erroneously concluded the proposed rule has no implications for federalism. 
1.A. EPA lacks authority under the Clean Water Act to promulgate this rule 
The EPA cites the Clean Water Act (CWA) as providing the proper authority to promulgate this 
proposed rule. However, there is no specific provision in the statute that authorizes this broad 
rulemaking. Nor does any court case cited by the EPA authorize this action. 
The proposed rule would unlawfully mandate that states, including Wisconsin, adopt new 
designated uses inconsistent with CWA. The Clean Water Act sets the framework for states to adopt 
water quality standards, requiring states to base such standards on designated uses of the 
waterbody. In establishing such standards, states are required to consider factors including the 
value of waterbodies for public water supplies, wildlife, recreation, agriculture, industry, and 
navigation. 
This proposed rule would violate the existing CWA statutory framework by stipulating “tribal 
reserved right” designated uses would supersede the other factors considered by states when 
establishing water quality standards. This is not lawful; the Clean Water Act affords states like 
Wisconsin the ability to set standards that consider a range of designated uses. 
 
1.B. EPA has failed to consider implementation challenges and costs 
It is unclear how the EPA expects states to implement this rule. Within the rule, the EPA requires 
states to protect tribal rights, but the agency does not know the scope of such rights. The vast 
majority of claims to tribal reserved rights have not been adjudicated. This proposed rule puts 
states in the extremely difficult position of deriving water quality standards from implied reserved 
rights without objective standards or procedures to follow. 
This raises the question of how such water quality standards will be evaluated by the EPA. Under 
the proposed rule, the EPA intends to evaluate minimum standards on a case-by-case basis after 
identifying and interpreting all applicable tribal reserved rights. Conversely, CWA generally provides 
that minimum standards under the law utilize the best available science. 

 
3 | P a g e  
 
In other words, the proposed rule upends current practice for standard setting and forces states to 
guess as to set the appropriate standards via tribal reserved rights. This undermines transparency 
and predictability for the setting of water quality standards, the opposite of what the EPA claims is a 
goal of this rulemaking. 
Just as critically, the EPA failed to conduct a robust cost analysis with this proposed rule. When the 
EPA promulgated federal water quality standards in the State of Washington, businesses estimated 
compliance costs in the billions of dollars. Notably, the standards prescribed a fish consumption 
rate to protect tribal subsistence anglers with a 10-6 risk rate for the general population. Since the 
proposed rule would mandate such practices in all states with tribal reserved rights, the cost of this 
rule could easily exceed tens of billions of dollars, or more. 
The EPA needs to consider such costs, both to ensure conformity with the Administrative Procedure 
Act (APA) and to inform the regulated community and the public of the incredible compliance costs 
associated with this proposed rule. 
 
1.C. EPA erroneously concluded the proposal has no federalism implications 
Surprisingly, the EPA concludes that the rulemaking does not have federalism implications. The EPA 
further concludes that the rulemaking does not have “substantial direct effects” on the relationship 
or division of power between the national government in Washington and state governments. 
However, the proposed rule plainly impacts the federalism framework established by the Clean 
Water Act. Under the proposal, water quality standards established by a state could be usurped by 
another sovereign entity. Such a sovereign entity could be a tribe or even the EPA itself, if the EPA 
elected to recognize water quality standards proposed via tribal reserved rights over other lawfully-
enacted state standards.  
The EPA’s conclusion that the rule has no federalism implications is disconnected from reality, and 
arbitrary and capricious. Thus, it is a violation of the APA. 
2. Wisconsin’s existing regulations already comply with proposed 40 CFR § 131.9(c) 
To reiterate, WMC urges the EPA to withdraw the proposed rulemaking for the aforementioned 
reasons. However, if the agency insists on moving forward with this deeply flawed rule, WMC urges 
the following modifications to lessen the burden on Wisconsin’s business community. 
To begin, EPA has requested comment on the proposed 40 CFR § 131.9, which would require states 
to designate uses that either expressly incorporate protection of the tribal reserved treaty rights or 
encompass such rights (proposed section 131.9(c)(1)); establish water quality criteria to protect 
tribal reserved rights (proposed section 131.9(c)(2)); and/or use applicable antidegradation 
requirements to maintain and protect tribal reserved rights (proposed section 131.9(c)(3)).  
But in proposing these requirements, EPA is not writing on a blank slate. Wisconsin has been a 
leader in implementing treaty rights for decades, under the “Voigt Commission” established to 
implement the decision in Lac Courte Oreilles v. Voigt, 700 F. 2d 341 (7th Cir. 1983). Wisconsin has a 
long-standing process whereby the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (DNR) works with 

 
4 | P a g e  
 
the Great Lakes Indian Fisheries and Wildlife Commission (GLIFWIC) to ensure compliance with 
existing usufructuary treaty rights and manage sustainable harvests. Wisconsin has also designated 
numerous water bodies in the Ceded Territory as either “Exceptional Resource Waters” (ERW) or 
“Outstanding Resources Waters” (ORW) under chapter NR 102, Wis. Admin. Code, subjecting these 
waters to heightened protections, including antidegradation requirements.   
Given the above, Wisconsin has already established a comprehensive regulatory scheme to ensure 
that water quality standards are set at levels protective of usufructuary rights established by treaty.  
To recognize this, WMC requests that EPA add a provision to proposed 40 CFR § 131.9(d), providing 
a mechanism by which a state may meet the requirements of proposed 40 CFR § 131.9(c)(1)-(3) by 
submitting a demonstration that existing designated uses and water quality criteria encompass 
protection of tribal reserved rights and are already set at levels protective of tribal rights.  
3. Requirement to consider “unsuppressed” consumption of resources 
EPA is also taking comments on proposed 40 CFR § 131.9(a)(1) regarding whether to “require that 
where tribal reserved rights apply, and where supported by available data and information, WQS 
must be established to protect the exercise of the tribal reserved rights unsuppressed by water 
quality or availability of the aquatic or aquatic dependent resource” by setting a fish consumption 
rate (“FCR”) representative of a traditional subsistence lifestyle. 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,369, 74,370.  
While this approach may be workable for large water bodies with a significant carrying capacity, 
many of the small rivers and streams within the Ceded Territory in Wisconsin have low or 
intermittent flows and have a limited carrying capacity that would not support full-time subsistence 
fishing. Requiring the state to establish water quality standards that explicitly ignores the 
“availability of the aquatic dependent resource” for all such waters may force DNR to set water 
quality standards based upon the potential presence of sensitive species that may or may not even 
be present in the regulated streams and that historically were not consumed from those streams at 
a subsistence level. To address this, WMC requests that EPA delete the phrase “or availability of the 
aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource” from proposed 40 CFR § 131.9(a)(1) to account for natural 
limitations in the carrying capacity of these waters.   
4. Establishing wild rice protection areas based on future restoration plans 
Finally, EPA proposes to designate areas for wild rice protection in the Great Lakes region that do 
not currently support wild rice uses, based on consideration of historical growing patterns and 
planned efforts to restore the hydrological regime and reduce nonpoint sources of pollution. 87 
Fed. Reg at 74,369, 74,370. Specifically, EPA states that “A state might consider historical growing 
patterns and planned efforts to restore the hydrologic regime and reduce nonpoint sources of 
pollution, while also accounting for hydrologic changes and legacy contaminants that may not be 
feasible to remedy at this time.” Id. at 74, 369. But this proposal goes far beyond the current 
designated use framework and would instead require states to knowingly designate uses that are 
not “existing uses” and that cannot be met in the future. “Existing uses are those actually attained 
in the water body on or after November 28, 1975 . . . “ See id. at 74,372 n.71, citing 40 CFR § 
131.3(e).  

 
5 | P a g e  
 
The proposed rule would require Wisconsin and other states to establish designated uses and water 
quality standards, specifically for wild rice protection, for waters within the state based upon the 
somewhat vague criteria of “proposed restoration efforts.” This proposal would require states to 
assign designated uses and water quality standards that cannot currently be met by certain waters, 
due to hydrologic changes or legacy contaminants—which would then force those states to 
subsequently classify the waters so designated as “impaired” for purposes of Section 303(d) of 
CWA.   
Such a proposal goes far beyond EPA’s mandate. It also creates a disincentive to states to attempt 
restoration of wild rice growing areas, given the requirement to establish designated uses that may 
not be met and the potential for an impaired designation. Furthermore, it potentially would create 
conflict with other upstream practices that are exempt from regulation under CWA, specifically 
areas subject to silviculture harvesting and to cranberry cultivation, which has traditionally been 
treated as an “agricultural return flow” excluded from regulation under state and federal law. To 
avoid these concerns, WMC requests that EPA clarify in the final rule that states are not required to 
establish designated uses for wild rice production for areas that have not supported that use since 
November 28, 1975.  
5. Conclusion 
 
WMC again urges the EPA to withdraw its proposed rulemaking, as the proposed rule is arbitrary 
and capricious, and therefore unlawful. However, if the EPA does move forward, WMC urges the 
EPA to consider the aforementioned modifications to reduce the rule’s impact on Wisconsin’s 
business community. 
Finally, WMC encourages the EPA to review the detailed written comments submitted by the U.S. 
Chamber of Commerce, which further highlights the significant problems with this proposed rule. 
Thank you for your consideration of WMC’s comments. Please do not hesitate to contact me with 
any questions. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
Craig Summerfield 
Director of Environmental & Energy Policy 
Wisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-0304 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791 ---
Y U ROK  T R I B E  
190 Klamath Boulevard • Post Office Box 1027 • Klamath, CA 95548 
Phone: (707) 482-1350 • Fax: (707) 482-1377 
March 6, 2023 
 
Michael S. Regan, Administrator  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
Office of the Administrator, 1101A  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
 Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal: https://www.regulations.gov/ 
 
Re: Revisions to the Federal Water Quality Standards Regulations to Protect Tribal Reserved 
Rights, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791  
 
 Aiy-ye-kwee’ Administrator Regan, 
 
The Yurok Tribe (Tribe), a sovereign nation and federally recognized Indian Tribe, appreciates 
the opportunity to express its general support for, and provide substantive comments1 on, the 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed revisions to the Clean Water Act (CWA) water 
quality standards (WQS) regulations at 40 C.F.R. § 131 (Proposed Regulations).2 The Yurok Tribe 
commends EPA’s efforts to require states to evaluate tribal reserved rights to aquatic and/or aquatic-
dependent resources in an area or downstream of an area when developing new and revised WQS. 
Overall, the proposed regulations represent a crucial step toward ensuring reserved rights to aquatic 
and aquatic-dependent resources are protected for federally recognized Tribes and their members.  
However, the Tribe suggests additional language to the Proposed Regulations to further 
support Tribal sovereignty, further increase protection of aquatic and non-aquatic resources to 
reduce exposure risk to Tribal members and further enhance physical and cultural wellbeing of 
Tribal members, and to further increase protection of Tribal reserved rights. To that end, the Tribe 
writes to express concerns with specific aspects of the Proposed Rule to ensure that the Yurok 
People can meaningfully exercise their fishing rights while ensuring their health and safety—and the 
health and safety of the resources themselves—are adequately protected. Some of these concerns 
include: (1) ensuring states submit data consistent with long term restoration efforts and traditional 
ecological knowledge (TEK) provided by tribes; (2) specifying compliance with federal statutes such 
as the Endangered Species Act (ESA); (3) ensuring long-term restoration projects are considered 
when determining the unsuppressed level of an aquatic or aquatic-dependent resource; and (4) 
 
1 The Yurok Tribe thanks JoAnn Kintz and Maher Mahmood from Democracy Forward and the University of Berkely 
Center for Law, Energy, & the Environment for their assistance in preparing this comment. 
2 40 C.F.R. §§ 131.3 (adding definitions for “tribal reserved rights” and “rights holders”), 131.5 (adding “tribal reserved 
rights” to factors EPA considers), 131.6 (requiring state documentation of consideration of “tribal reserved rights”), 
131.9 (adding “tribal reserved rights” and substantive and procedural requirements for their addition to WQS) and 
131.20 (adding evaluation of whether there are tribal reserved rights applicable to waters subject to the state's WQS and 
whether WQS need to be revised to protect those rights). 

 
 
Page 2 
 
 
ensuring the acceptable risk of cancer rate under the proposed regulations sufficiently protects tribal 
subsistence communities. 
I. The Tribe is a Relevant Rights Holder 
The Yurok Tribe is the largest Native nation within California with over 6,400 members. 
The Yurok People have always lived along the Pacific Coast and inland on the Klamath River. As 
stated in the Yurok Constitution: 
 
The Ancestral Lands of the Yurok Tribe extend unbroken along the Pacific Ocean coast 
(including usual and customary offshore fishing areas) from Damnation Creek, its northern 
boundary, to the southern boundary of the Little River drainage basin, and unbroken along 
the Klamath River, including both sides and its bed, from its mouth upstream to and 
including the Bluff Creek drainage basin. Included within these lands are the drainage basin 
of Wilson Creek, the drainage basins of all streams entering the Klamath River from its 
mouth upstream to and including the Bluff Creek and Slate Creek drainage basins, including 
the village site at Big Bar (except for the drainage basin upstream from the junction of Pine 
Creek and Snow Camp Creek), and the Canyon Creek (also known as Tank Creek) drainage 
basin of the Trinity River, the drainage basins of streams entering the ocean or lagoons 
between the Klamath River and Little River (except for the portion of the Redwood Creek 
drainage basin beyond the McArthur Creek drainage basin, and except for the portion of the 
Little River drainage basin which lies six miles up from the ocean). Our Ancestral Lands 
include all submerged lands, and the beds, banks and waters of all the tributaries within the 
territory just described. Also included within the Ancestral Lands is a shared interest with 
other tribes in ceremonial high country sites and trails as known by the Tribe, as well as the 
Tribe’s usual and customary hunting, fishing and gathering sites.3 
 
The Yurok Tribe has both express and implied reserved rights through the executive order 
that established the Yurok Reservation,4 the Hoopa-Yurok Settlement Act of 1988 (HYSA) and the 
Winters doctrine. As the Ninth Circuit explained in Metlakatla, “[t]he type of legal instrument that 
establishes a reservation […] makes no difference to our inquiry into a tribe’s attendant resource 
rights.”5   
 
The Yurok Reservation was established by executive order on November 16, 1855, pursuant 
to the authority granted by the Act of March 3, 18536 and the Act of March 3, 1855,7 which authorized 
the President to establish reservations for “Indian purposes” in California.8 The Reservation is 
comprised of the lower forty-five miles of the Klamath River, a mile on either side, from the Yurok 
village of Req-woi at the mouth of the Klamath River to upstream of the Yurok village of Weych-
pues. Though the executive order is silent as to the Yurok’s right to water, under the reserved water 
rights doctrine established in Winters v. United States, 207 U.S. 564 (1908) (Winters doctrine) and its 
progeny, the Yurok Tribe has an implied right to the “amount of water necessary to fulfill the purpose 
 
3 The Yurok Constitution, Article 1, Section 1.  
4 See Mattz v. Arnett, 412 U.S. 481, 484 (1973). 
5 Metlakatla Indian Cmty. v. Dunleavy, 58 F.4th 1034, 1046, 2023 WL 1421500 (9th Cir. 2023). 
6 10 Stat. 226, 238. 
7 10 Stat. 686, 699. 
8 See Mattz, 412 U.S. at 487. 

 
 
Page 3 
 
 
of the reservation.”9 The Yurok Reservation was established on the lower Klamath River so the Tribe 
could maintain its fishing and river-centric way of life, reserving to the Tribe fishing and water rights 
to support that lifestyle and conferring a legal duty on the federal government to protect those rights.10  
The Klamath River and its fishery are “not much less necessary to the existence of the [Yurok] than 
the atmosphere they breathe[.]”11   
 
In addition to the rights asserted above, the Yurok Tribe has specified reserved rights as 
outlined by the HYSA.12 In recognizing the two distinct reservations for the Yurok and Hoopa Valley 
Tribes, the HYSA declared that “[t]he unallotted trust land and assets” would be held in trust by the 
United States for the benefit of the two Tribes.13 The legislation also established and confirmed “the 
property interests of the Yurok Tribe…including its interest in the fishery, enabling the Tribe to 
organize and assume governing authority.”14 As Congress and the United States Supreme Court have 
recognized, access and relationship with the waters and fish within them are inseparable from the 
existence of and relationship between the Yurok Tribe and the land.15  
 
The Yurok People, the Tribe’s inherent sovereignty, and the Yurok Constitution provide the 
Tribal government authority to create Yurok laws, manage Yurok lands and natural resources, and 
adjudicate violations of Yurok laws in Yurok Tribal Court. The Yurok Tribe’s jurisdiction extends 
throughout the Yurok Ancestral Territory and “to all of its members wherever located, to all persons 
throughout its territory, and within its territory, over all lands, waters, riverbeds, submerged lands, 
properties, air space, minerals, fish, forests, wildlife, and other resources, and any interest therein now 
or in the future.”16 Via the adoption of the Yurok Constitution, the Yurok Tribe, in its governing 
authority, strives to:  
1) Preserve forever the survival of our tribe and protect it from forces which may threaten its 
existence;  
2) Uphold and protect our tribal sovereignty which has existed from time immemorial and 
which remains undiminished; 
3) Reclaim the tribal land base within the Yurok Reservation and enlarge the Reservation 
boundaries to the maximum extent possible within the ancestral lands of our tribe and/or 
within any compensatory land area;  
4) Preserve and promote our culture, language, and religious beliefs and practices, and pass 
them on to our children, our grandchildren, and to their children and grandchildren on, 
forever;  
5) Provide for the health, education, economy, and social wellbeing of our members and future 
members;  
6) Restore, enhance, and manage the tribal fishery, tribal water rights, tribal forests, and all 
other natural resources; and  
 
9 Cappaert v. United States, 426 U.S. 128, 141 (1976). 
10 See Baley v. United States, 942 F.3d 1312, 1335 (Fed. Cir. 2019); Klamath Water Users Protective Ass’n v. Patterson, 204 F.3d 
1206, 1213 (9th Cir. 1999); Parravano v. Babbitt, 70 F.3d 539, 541 (9th Cir. 1995). 
11 Blake v. Arnett, 663 F.2d 906, 909 (9th Cir. 1981) (quoting United States v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371, 381 (1905)). 
12 25 U.S.C. § 1300i available at PL 100–580 (S 2723), PL 100–580, October 31, 1988, 102 Stat 2924. 
13 Id. at § 1300i-1(b) & (c) (emphasis added). 
14 Parravano v. Babbitt, 70 F.3d 539, 546 (9th Cir. 1995) (citing S.R. 564, 100th Cong., 2d Sess., 2–9 (1988); H.R. 938, Pt. 1, 
100th Cong., 2d Sess., 8–15). 
15 See Mattz, 412 U.S. at 487–88 (1973) (iterating that a specific, primary purpose for establishing the reservation was to 
secure to the Indians the access and right to fish without interference from others). 
16 Yurok Const. art. I, § 3. 

 
 
Page 4 
 
 
7) Ensure peace, harmony, and protection of individual human rights among our members 
and among others who may come within the jurisdiction of our tribal government.17  
 
Accordingly, the Tribe has a vested interest as a “rights holder” under the Proposed Regulations 
and submits the following substantive comments in support of its inherent Tribal sovereignty over 
aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources both on and off reservation, in support of the physical, 
cultural, economic, and social wellbeing of its members, and for the restoration and enhancement of 
Tribal natural resources, fisheries, waters, and forests. 
 
A. History of the Klamath River 
Water quality is of great importance to the Yurok Tribe, since a substantial portion of its 
history, culture, identity, spirituality, and economy is derived from the Klamath River and its 
resources. The River is considered the lifeblood of the people.18 Because of this intrinsic relationship 
between Yurok People and the River, one of the Tribe’s highest priorities is to protect and preserve 
the resources of the Klamath River in order to sustain the future of the Yurok People.  
 
When the Klamath Reservation was first established in 1855,19 the River had many fish 
species including salmon, steelhead, eulachon, lamprey, and green sturgeon.20 Today, Klamath River 
fish populations are a small fraction of their historic amounts. Over the past century, drought 
conditions and the ecological impacts of the Klamath River dams and their artificial reservoirs 
(which blocked key inland routes the salmon rely on) have resulted in low flows, increased water 
temperatures, poor water quality, significant fish habitat degradation, and habitat loss. These effects 
have had a devastating impact on the fisheries and the Yurok People. Numerous other land and 
water management practices have led to a decline in the Tribe’s access to its fishery resources, 
including gold mining, timber harvest, road construction, cattle grazing, and water diversions.21 
 
Low flows and warmer temperatures have caused repeated outbreaks of parasites among 
salmon leading to extreme mortality rates. In 2002, a catastrophic fish kill, known as the “Klamath 
Fish Kill,” left over 70,000 adult salmon dead along the banks of the Klamath River.22 Less than 
twenty years later, another catastrophic fish kill occurred. In 2021, over 70 percent of the young, 
 
17 Yurok Const. pmbl. 
18 Kathleen Sloan, Yurok and the Klamath River: Yurok Historical Context and Data for Assessing Current Conditions and 
the Effects of the proposed Klamath Restoration Project on Yurok Tribal Trust Assets and Yurok Resources of Cultural and 
Religious Significance, 3 (Feb. 2011),  https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/dam-migration/yurok_klamath_doi_2011.pdf. 
19 Mattz v. Arnett, 412 U.S. 481, 484 (1973). 
20 Sloan, supra note 18, at 4.  
21 Laurel Gonzeli et al., Klamath Dam Removal Science Coordination Workshop Summary Report (Feb.11, 2021), 
https://www.yuroktribe.org/_files/ugd/23c897_a9b7fadb1e1e4b16b1cea02287f02d4c.pdf. 
22 The Yurok Tribe, Federal Regulators Green Light Largest River Restoration Project in US History (Nov. 17, 2022), 
https://www.yuroktribe.org/post/federal-regulators-green-light-largest-river-restoration-project-in-us-history; Michael 
Belchik et al., The Klamath River Fish Kill of 2002; Analysis of Contributing Factors, Yurok Tribal Fisheries Program (Feb. 
2004),  
https://www.waterboards.ca.gov/waterrights/water_issues/programs/bay_delta/california_waterfix/exhibits/docs/PCFF
A&IGFR/part2/pcffa_155.pdf 

 
 
Page 5 
 
 
ocean-bound Chinook salmon, the only commercial salmon remaining in the Klamath River,23 were 
killed by a parasitic infection.24 While the parasite—Ceratonova shasta—is naturally occurring, 
conditions, such as drought spurred on by climate change, and man-made factors, such as the four 
hydroelectric dams on the mainstem of the Klamath, increase the prevalence of the disease 
exponentially.25 More recently, the Mckinney Fire in California destroyed more than 45,000 acres of 
forest impacting the Klamath River. Debris from the fire, in combination with an intense 
thunderstorm, led to landslides that thickened the River with mud for 155 miles, causing oxygen 
levels in the River to drop and killing tens of thousands fish.26 In addition to fish kill, there was a 
prolonged drought between late 2011 to early 2017,27and again in 2021,28 when inflows with the 
Klamath Basin were at historic low levels. These are but a few examples of the conditions that the 
Yurok Tribe and Yurok People have had to endure over the past twenty years.  
 
Climate change continues to be a threat to the Yurok Tribe. According to the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (“NOAA”), based on 30-year averages, the Klamath 
Basin is increasingly warmer and dryer. Climate change has resulted in: 1) loss of snowpack and 
higher water temperatures that threaten the salmon and other resources of the Klamath River; 2) 
increased demand for scarce water supplies; 3) greater precipitation extremes (drought to flood 
cycle); 4) sea level rise; 5) land and fire management; and 6) community health issues.29  
 
Degraded conditions on the Klamath River and dramatic declines in fish population have 
wrought extraordinary economic, spiritual, and cultural hardships on Yurok members. 
 
● Economic: From 2016–2021, the Yurok Tribe closed its commercial fishery, including its 
subsistence fishery in 2017, based on the record-low salmon returns.30 In 2020, the Yurok 
Tribe’s Fall Chinook allocation was 6,906 adult fish, which is far below necessary to meet 
 
23 Juliet Grable, In the Klamath River Basin, the Drought Punishes Everyone, Sierra (June 4, 2021), 
https://www.sierraclub.org/sierra/klamath-river-basin-drought-punishes-everyone. 
24 Id.  
25 Id.  
26 Scott Harding, Klamath River Devastated by Wildfire-Related Fish Kill, Hyropower Reform Coalition (Aug. 9, 2022), 
https://hydroreform.org/2022/08/klamath-river-devastated-by-wildfire-related-fish-kill/. 
27 See Grable supra note 23.  
28 Cong. Rsch. Serv., IN11689, Drought in the Klamath River Basin 1 (2022), 
https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/IN/IN11689/3#:~:text=Recent%20Drought%20and%20Federal%20Respon
se,for%20irrigators%20(Figure%202). 
29Testimony of the Yurok Tribe before the House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations, Subcommittee on 
Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies Regarding the Impact of Climate Change to the Yurok Tribe (Mar. 6, 2019), 
https://docs.house.gov/meetings/AP/AP06/20190306/109006/HHRG-116-AP06-Wstate-JamesJ-20190306.pdf; Yurok 
Tribe: Climate Change Adaptation Plan for Water and Aquatic Resources, Northern Arizona University: Institute for 
Tribal Environmental Professionals, 
https://www7.nau.edu/itep/main/tcc/Tribes/pn_yurok#:~:text=Traditional%20Aquatic%20Species%3A%20Climate%20
effects,access%20%E2%80%93%20for%20Yurok%20Tribal%20Members. 
30 The Yurok Tribe, Catastrophic Juvenile Fish Kill Unfolds in Real Time on the Klamath River: Massive Disease Outbreak 
Puts Klamath Salmon on Path to Extinction (May 13, 2021), 
https://www.yuroktribe.org/post/catastrophic-juvenile-fish-kill-unfolds-in-real-time-on-the-klamath-river 

 
 
Page 6 
 
 
their subsistence and ceremonial needs, let alone their commercial needs.31 Many members 
faced economic hardship as they rely on salmon for their livelihood, either through selling 
fish or sport-fishing tourism.32 As one member notes, a rich salmon harvest “feeds the 
family” and “buy[s] our kids school clothes.”33 Tribal businesses also lost annual income 
from lack of fish supply.34 Economic hardships are magnified even further in a community 
where the average annual income of tribal members on the Yurok Reservation is $11,000 
annually35 which is below the poverty line.36 
 
● Spiritual and Cultural: Traditional Yurok ceremonies rely on the quality of water so that Tribal 
members can properly perform their cultural and spiritual traditions. For example, 
ceremonies such as the Brush Dance, Jump Dance, White Deerskin Dance, and Boat Dance, 
require close proximity to the Klamath River.37 Part of the ceremonial practice includes 
bathing in and drinking the River water, which is directly connected to water quality. As one 
member of the Yurok Tribe recalls, because many of the ceremonies revolve around salmon, 
it helps her connect to her ancestral heritage: “My people have lived on the Klamath for 
thousands of years, and I know that the salmon today are the descendants of those my 
ancestors managed. These salmon are a direct tie to my ancestors—the physical 
representation of their love for me.”38 A threat to the water quality is a direct threat to these 
deep-rooted spiritual and cultural practices.  
 
Despite the difficulty that the Yurok Tribe has faced in fighting to protect the Klamath River 
and the salmon, and while there is still significant work to be done, the Tribe is optimistic that recent 
developments will assist in better outcomes in the near and long term. On November 17, 2022, the 
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) issued an order surrendering licenses to the Lower 
Klamath Project and approving the removal of four dams from the Klamath Basin.39 This is the 
largest restoration effort in history, made possible by the joint efforts of the Karuk Tribe, Yurok 
Tribe, California, Oregon, conservation organizations, commercial fishing organizations, and dam 
 
31 Letter from Chairman Joseph L. James to Gina Raimonda, Sec’y of Commerce, Re: Commercial Fishery Disaster 
Declaration for the 2020 Yurok Klamath River Commercial Fishery (Apr. 15, 2021), 
https://media.fisheries.noaa.gov/2021-09/21-073899_Yurok%20incoming.pdf 
32Brook Thompson, The Familial Bond Between the Klamath River and the Yurok People: How a Tribal Community’s 
Health is Intimately Connected to the Health of the River, High Country News (Aug. 14, 2021), 
https://www.hcn.org/issues/53.9/indigenous-affairs-klamath-basin-the-familial-bond-between-the-klamath-river-and-the-
yurok-people 
33Lise Morehouse, 'It Takes Our Purpose': With No Salmon, Yurok Tribe Struggles With Identity, NPR (Nov. 29, 2017), 
https://www.npr.org/sections/thesalt/2017/11/29/561581193/it-takes-our-purpose-with-no-salmon-yurok-tribe-
struggles-with-identity 
34See Sloan supra note 18 at 43.  
35 Yurok Tribe, Written Testimony Regarding H.R> 5548, Fishery Failures: Urgently Needed Disaster Declarations Act 
(Jan. 14, 2020), https://www.congress.gov/116/meeting/house/110359/witnesses/HHRG-116-II13-Wstate-MyersF-
20200114.pdf 
36 Id.  
37 See Sloan supra note 18 at 43.  
38See Thompson supra note 32.  
39 Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, Order Modifying and Approving Surrender of License and Removal of Project 
Facilities (Nov. 17, 2022), https://www.opb.org/pdf/Klamath%20Project%20Order_1668750641288.pdf. 

 
 
Page 7 
 
 
owner PacifiCorp. Restoration efforts are slated to begin later this year, opening up hundreds of 
miles of historic salmon habitat and improving water quality, paving the way for the Klamath River 
to recover from the inhospitable conditions it’s faced and for the salmon to come home. 40  
 
In addition, to address impacts of climate change President Biden signed the Inflation 
Reduction Act (IRA), which provides funding specifically for tribal communities to address threats 
posed by climate change.41 And on December 8, 2022, Secretary Haaland of the Department of the 
Interior announced that tribal water projects in the Klamath River Basin will receive $5.8 million “to 
restore aquatic ecosystems, improve the resilience of habitats, and mitigate the effects of the 
ongoing drought crisis.”42 This funding includes a Juvenile Salmonid Survival and Migration Rate 
Study conducted jointly by the Hoopa Valley Tribe, Karuk Tribe and Yurok Tribe, as well as discrete 
funding to the Yurok Tribe to conduct habitat restoration in the Oregon Gulch Project, Mainstem 
Trinity River.43 The Yurok Tribe applauds these efforts.  
 
And in line with these efforts, EPA’s Proposed Rule requiring consideration of tribal reserved 
rights when establishing WQS “is a critical component of reducing the impact of climate change on 
tribes.”44 As additional efforts are made to address climate-related challenges facing tribal 
communities,  EPA needs to continue to consider that many tribes are more vulnerable to the impacts 
of climate change based on their interdependence and connectedness to the environment for their 
livelihood and existence. Tribes have limited flexibility when it comes to accessing new gathering 
places and hunting grounds.45 And the Yurok Tribe should not bear the disproportionate burden of 
the ecological impacts that have occurred outside its control. It is thus imperative to address these 
rapid changes through a close partnership between tribal, federal, and state interests to develop 
creative solutions to address the complexities of this global issue.  
 
B. The EPA has a Trust Responsibility to the Yurok Tribe and its Federally Reserved 
Fishing and Water Rights  
The Yurok Reservation was established on the lower Klamath River so the Tribe could 
maintain its fishing and river-centric way of life, reserving to the Tribe fishing and water rights to 
support that lifestyle and conferring a legal duty on the federal government to protect those rights. 
See Baley v. United States, 942 F.3d 1312, 1335 (Fed. Cir. 2019); Klamath Water Users Protective Ass’n v. 
Patterson, 204 F.3d 1206, 1213 (9th Cir. 1999) (the Bureau and United States act “as a trustee for the 
 
40 The Yurok Tribe, Federal Regulators Green Light Largest River Restoration Project in US History (Nov. 18, 2022), 
https://www.yuroktribe.org/post/federal-regulators-green-light-largest-river-restoration-project-in-us-history. 
41Domestic Policy Council, The White House Tribal Nations Summit Progress Report (2022), 
https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/11/2022_11_23-WH-Tribal-Nations-Summit-Progress-
Report-Final.pdf 
42 Press Release, Dep’t of the Interior, During Visit to Klamath River, Secretary Haaland Announces Four Tribal Water 
Projects (Dec. 8, 2022), https://www.doi.gov/pressreleases/during-visit-klamath-river-secretary-haaland-announces-
four-tribal-water-projects. 
43 Id.  
44  Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, 87 Fed. Reg. 74,361 (proposed Dec. 
5, 2022) (to be codified at 40 C.F.R. Part 131), https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OW-2021-0791-
0001. 
45 T.M. Bull Bennett et al., Ch. 12: Indigenous Peoples, Lands, and Resources. Climate Change Impacts in the United States: The Third 
National Climate Assessment, J. M. Melillo, Terese (T.C.) Richmond, and G. W. Yohe, Eds., U.S. Global Change Research 
Program, 297- 317, https://nca2014.globalchange.gov/report/sectors/indigenous-peoples#intro- 

 
 
Page 8 
 
 
Tribes, has a responsibility to protect their rights and resources.”); Parravano v. Babbitt, 70 F.3d 539, 
541 (9th Cir.1995). The Klamath River and its fishery are “not much less necessary to the existence 
of the [Yurok] than the atmosphere they breathe[.]” Blake v. Arnett, 663 F.2d 906, 909 (9th Cir. 1981) 
(quoting United States v. Winans, 198 U.S. 371, 381 (1905)). As elaborated above, through the creation 
of the Yurok Reservation, the Yurok Tribe has federally reserved fishing and water rights that must 
be supported and protected by the United States under its trust responsibility toward the Yurok 
Tribe. 
 
The EPA, as a federal agency, shares the United States’ trust responsibility to the Yurok 
Tribe to ensure its actions and policies protect the Yurok Tribe’s rights and resources. EPA’s 
proposed rule is in furtherance of the trust responsibility and is necessary to protect tribes’ federal 
reserved fishing and water rights, as well as their sovereign interests in protecting these rights.  As 
the EPA correctly observes in its proposed rule, tribes’ reserved rights to use and access the natural 
and cultural resources are a key part of tribal life and “are of deep cultural, economic, and 
subsistence importance to the tribes.”46 The Yurok Tribe therefore supports EPA’s efforts to 
require states to evaluate tribal reserved rights to aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources in an area 
or downstream of an area when states are developing or revising WQS.   
 
Specifically, by providing a multi-layered effort to include tribes’ input and expertise in 
determining when and how state WQS may impact their tribal reserved rights, EPA ensures that 
tribes will have a meaningful and substantial role throughout the process. As EPA explains, 
determining whether waters subject to state WQS impact a tribal reserved right involves an in-depth 
inquiry into several aspects of the right, including the type of right, where it is exercised, and in what 
manner.47 This necessarily requires significant coordination with the impacted tribe. The Yurok 
Tribe supports EPA’s regulatory provisions that require coordination and consultation with 
impacted tribes early and often in this process by requiring that (1) when states assess the scope of 
tribal reserved rights, their assessment must be informed by the right holders themselves and that (2) 
EPA consult with affected rights holders when determining whether states WQS submissions 
adequately protect tribal reserved rights.  
 
The Tribe makes the following suggestions to further strengthen the proposed regulatory 
framework and protections for tribes: 
 
II. 
Proposed Regulations at 40 C.F.R. § 131.6 (g): Minimum Requirements for Water 
Quality Standards Submission 
 
40 C.F.R. § 131.6 (g) should incorporate language to include future uses in alignment with the 
three-year review process required for states under 40 C.F.R. § 131.20 and specify the inclusion of 
Traditional Ecological Knowledge as a type of data that may be used to develop water quality 
standards. The Tribe suggests adding the following language (bold and underlined) to 40 C.F.R. 
§ 131.6 (g):  
Where applicable, information which will aid the agency in evaluating whether the submission protects 
tribal reserved rights consistent with § 131.9, including: 
 
46 Proposed Water Quality Standards, supra note 44. 
47 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,367.  

 
 
Page 9 
 
 
(1) Information about the scope, nature, and past, and current, and three-year forecasted 
use of the tribal reserved rights, as informed by the right holders; and 
(2) Data and methods used to develop the water quality standards, including Traditional 
Ecological Knowledge, if provided by tribes with free and informed consent.  
 
A. Rationale for Including Projected Future Use in WQS Submissions  
EPA proposes requiring that the unsuppressed level of a resource should “account for 
situations where restoration efforts are planned or underway (e.g., efforts to improve habitat or reduce 
contamination), such that it would be reasonable to expect the opportunities for use of the resource 
to increase in the future.”48 Although this language does not address the requisite time frame for a 
restoration effort to be considered in determining unsuppressed use levels, the Tribe interprets this 
provision to include longer-term restoration projects such as the Klamath dam removals. As noted 
above, in November 2022, the FERC approved the surrender of the Lower Klamath Project license 
and the removal of the four project developments on the river, which will be the largest dam removal 
and river restoration project in the world when it occurs.49 Removal of the four dams is planned to 
take place between summer 2023 and the end of 2024.50 The Tribe believes the Proposed Rule should 
account for the removal of the dams as a “restoration effort” in determining “unsuppressed use” of 
the Klamath, as it would be “reasonable to expect the opportunities for use” of the river to increase 
in the future after the dams are removed. To ensure the final rule is interpreted consistent with this 
belief, the Tribe requests that EPA clarify the requisite timeframe for a restoration project to trigger 
the requirement that the unsuppressed use of the water body be considered in setting water quality 
standards. 
 
It follows that if setting the unsuppressed level of a resource incorporates planned restoration 
efforts, states should submit information regarding forecasted use of tribal reserved rights as informed 
by tribes to ensure water quality standards accurately represent the unsuppressed level. 
 
B. Rationale for Including Traditional Ecological Knowledge in WQS 
Submissions 
 
40 C.F.R. § 131.6(g)(2) provides that states must submit data and methods used to develop 
water quality standards for EPA to ensure tribal reserved rights have been adequately taken into 
account in the development of the water quality standards. The Tribe recommends specifically 
including that Traditional Ecological Knowledge (TEK)51 if provided with free and informed 
 
48 Water Quality Standards, supra note 47. 
49 Associated Press, The largest dam demolition in history is approved for a Western river, NPR (Nov. 17, 2022), 
https://perma.cc/FUC7-FSKK.  
50 Malik Patterson, Klamath River dams to be removed by the end of 2024, KTVL (Nov. 19, 2022), 
https://perma.cc/Q5XP-7PXH. 
51 While there are many forms and definitions of Traditional Ecological Knowledge (“TEK”) and the term should be 
individually defined by impacted rights holders/tribes themselves based on their unique and specific beliefs and 
practices, the White House issued a memorandum in November 2021 recognizing Indigenous TEK as form of 
knowledge that contributes to scientific, technical, social, and economic advances. White House Office of Science and 
Technology Policy (OSTP) and White House Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ), Memorandum for the Heads of 
Federal Departments and Agencies: Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge and Federal Decision Making (Nov. 
15, 2021), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/11/111521-OSTP-CEQ-ITEK-Memo.pdf.  In 
follow up guidance issued by the White House OSTP and CEQ, it recognized Indigenous Knowledge as broadly 
speaking, “a body of observations, oral and written knowledge, innovations, practices, and beliefs developed by Tribes 

 
 
Page 10 
 
 
consent,52 should be a type of data that states provide. EPA’s Policy on Environmental Justice for 
Working with Federally Recognized Tribes and Indigenous Peoples provides that the principle of 
encouraging the integration of TEK into the Agency’s environmental science, policy, and decision-
making processes applies to EPA’s direct implementation of its programs. Certainly, this principle 
applies to EPA’s review of state water quality standards and assessment of whether they meet EPA’s 
minimum requirements. However, if states are not required, or at least encouraged to include TEK in 
the data submitted, then there is a high-risk states will opt not to include TEK. And if states do not 
include TEK in their submissions, EPA cannot integrate TEK into its review and assessment. 
Including the suggested language will ensure EPA is best positioned to integrate TEK into its review 
of state water quality standards and thereby better fulfill its commitment to providing tribes fair 
treatment and meaningful involvement in decisions affecting tribal members’ health and environment. 
 
III.  Proposed Regulations at 40 C.F.R. § 131.9: Establishment of Water Quality Standards 
Factors  
40 C.F.R. § 131.9 should incorporate principles of shared decision-making and intent on behalf 
of the EPA to seek funding to ensure substantial participation from right holders during tribal 
consultation. Federally recognized tribes, like the Yurok Tribe, have a nation-to-nation relationship 
with the federal government as sovereign governments that pre-date and are recognized under the 
United States Constitution. To strengthen those relationships, the federal government has committed 
to engaging in “regular and meaningful consultation and collaboration with tribal officials.”53Although 
the Proposed Regulations will require EPA to initiate tribal consultation with the right holders when 
reviewing WQS submissions to determine whether state WQS protect applicable reserved rights, it 
does not invite those tribal reserved right holders to contribute to or collaborate on WQS to protect 
those rights.54 The Proposed Regulations should enhance tribal sovereignty while also minimizing 
adverse impacts on tribal self-governance by allowing tribes, should they elect, as part of the tribal 
consultation process to submit plans and draft WQS for consideration to protect  resources to which 
they possess tribal reserved rights.  
 
The Tribe suggests adding the following language to 40 C.F.R. § 131.9 (b): “In reviewing State 
water quality standards submissions under this section, EPA will initiate tribal consultation with the 
right holders, consistent with applicable EPA tribal consultation policies” The EPA will consult 
with, and seek the participation of, the affected Indian tribes to the maximum extent 
practicable, including by providing affected tribes adequate opportunities to participate in 
data collection, consensus seeking, and associated processes. The EPA will seek to provide 
funding for any such tribal consultation. 
 
and Indigenous Peoples through interaction and experience with the environment.” White House OSTP and White 
House CEQ, Memorandum for the Heads of Federal Departments and Agencies: Guidance for Federal Departments 
and Agencies on Indigenous Knowledge (Nov. 30, 2022), https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2022/12/OSTP-CEQ-IK-Guidance.pdf. The guidance is “intended to promote and enable a 
Government-wide effort to improve the recognition and inclusion of Indigenous Knowledge.” Id. at 3. 
52 Confidentiality requirements for information regarding tribal cultural resources tribal consultation should also be 
developed or covered prior to the release of data to the EPA. 
53 Exec. Order No. 13175, Consultation and Coordination With Indian Tribal Governments, 65 Fed. Reg. 67,249 (Nov. 
6, 2000). See also Presidential Memorandum on Tribal Consultation and Strengthening Nation-to-Nation Relationships, 
86 Fed. Reg. 7491 (Jan. 29, 2021) (reaffirming the policies announced in Exec. Order 13175). 
54 Proposed Water Quality Standards Regulatory Revisions to Protect Tribal Reserved Rights, Environmental Protection. 
Agency (Nov. 2022), https://perma.cc/WA3P-H8B6. 

 
 
Page 11 
 
 
 
 This added language is, in part, borrowed from Joint Secretarial Order 3206 on American 
Indian Tribal Rights, Federal-Tribal Trust Responsibilities, and the Endangered Species Act 
(“Order”).55 The Order attempts to clarify the federal-tribal relationship under the ESA. Both tribal 
and federal government officials supported the Order’s impact on the shared responsibility of 
developing plans for the management of endangered species in Indian country, enhancing tribal 
sovereignty, and improving the government-to-government relationship.56 To that end, the Order 
directed agencies to “consult with, and seek the participation of, the affected Indian tribes to the 
maximum extent practicable . . . includ[ing by] providing affected tribes adequate opportunities to 
participate in data collection, consensus seeking, and associated processes.”57 Tribal government 
officials noted that effective communication with government agencies was crucial to the effective 
development of any such plans, and praised the requirement for increased communications of federal 
agencies on programs that may impact tribal resources after the Order.58  
 
Including similar language within the definition of tribal consultation in EPA’s Proposed Rule 
would enhance tribal partnerships in determining any requisite WQS protect tribal reserved rights. 
The Proposed Regulations would require states to include “documentation of the state’s efforts to 
obtain information about the existence of any applicable tribal reserved rights, their current and past 
use, scope, and nature, as well as the level of water quality that protects those rights.”59 Inviting tribes 
to participate in data collection, consensus seeking, and associated processes regarding the extent of 
their reserved rights would thus help to ensure meaningful collaboration and involvement.  
 
One final area of consensus among those interviewed regarding Joint Secretarial Order 3206 
was that funding was inadequate for the effective administration of the programs at issue.60 Funding 
for staffing, equipment, and land management was scarce and limited many tribes’ ability to participate 
in the process of formulating resource plans.61 For example, lack of funding led the Rosebud Sioux 
Tribe in South Dakota to discontinue environmental programs.62 Here, EPA’s Proposed Rule does 
not specify whether funding will be available to enhance tribal participation in consultation and WQS 
formation. Meaningful tribal participation in this process may require additional funding for tribes 
whose reserved rights are implicated by the proposed regulations.   
 
A. Unsuppressed Level Should Specifically Include Consideration of Other Federal 
Statutes such as the Endangered Species Act 
EPA’s proposed 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(1) would require that State WQS protect unsuppressed 
use of any resources to which tribal reserved rights apply.63 In determining the “unsuppressed level” 
 
55 Joint Secretarial Order No. 3206, American Indian Tribal Rights, Federal-Tribe Trust Responsibilities, and the 
Endangered Species Act (June 5, 1997), https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/elips/documents/3206-
american_indian_tribal_rights_federal-tribal_trust_responsibilities_and_the_endangered_species_act.pdf. 
56 Drew Kraniak, Conserving Endangered Species in Indian Country: The Success and Struggles of Joint Secretarial Order 3206 Nineteen 
Years On, 26 Colo. Nat. Resources, Energy & Envtl. L. Rev. 322 (Feb. 2015), https://perma.cc/YE7H-F7CJ. 
57 Joint Secretarial Order No. 3206, supra note 55. 
58 Kraniak, supra note 56. 
59 Proposed Water Quality Standards, supra note 54. 
60 Kraniak, supra note 56. 
61 Id. 
62 Id. 
63 87 Fed. Reg. 74,361. 

 
 
Page 12 
 
 
of a water body, the Rule requires balancing of “heritage use of a resource with what is currently 
reasonably achievable for a particular waterbody.”64 EPA has requested comment on “whether 
additional language should be included in the final rule specifying the considerations for determining 
unsuppressed WQS.”65 In determining what is reasonable to achieve for the waterbody, EPA should 
specify that compliance with other federal statutes, including the Endangered Species Act (ESA), is 
an important component of “reasonableness.” This may come into play when the ESA requires 
designation of part of a water body as critical habitat for an endangered or threatened species, thus 
restricting activities on the water body.66 Any cooperative agreements between Federal and State 
agencies that establish a program for the conservation of endangered and threatened species should 
also provide the state with valuable information regarding what is “reasonable to achieve” for a body 
of water.67  
 
For example, the District Court for the Northern District of California ruled on February 6th 
of this year that an order by the Oregon Water Resources Department blocking water releases from 
the Upper Klamath Lake impermissibly threatened downstream Coho Salmon and Southern Resident 
killer whale populations under the ESA.68  In determining unsuppressed use of any aquatic or aquatic-
dependent resources on the Klamath River to which tribal reserved rights apply, what is “reasonable 
to achieve” must include the planned water releases as well as any other future obligations imposed 
by the ESA to protect endangered or threatened species in the river. If the ESA compels a certain 
action to be taken on a water body, this action, and its attendant effects on water quality, should be 
considered per se reasonable to achieve for that body of water. 
 
B. Additional Guidance Should be Provided on Evaluating Evidence in Determining 
Unsuppressed Levels of the Exercise of Tribal Reserved Rights 
 
EPA lists several types of evidence when considering water quality necessary to protect 
aquatic or aquatic-dependent resources or users of the resources, including consideration of “fish 
consumption rate surveys, studies or accounts of heritage fish consumption rates, peer-reviewed 
articles or reports on the types and levels of pollutants that can adversely affect the resource in 
question, and monitoring data reflecting historic and/or current water quality.”69 The Yurok Tribe 
generally supports using available data and information as outlined in the proposed regulations to 
consider the water quality necessary to support meaningful exercise of tribal reserved rights, subject 
to the amendments outlined above. However, another important consideration to emphasize is the 
need to consider indigenous knowledge and tribal input at every stage in the process; not only 
should states consult with tribes when compiling data on the nature and scope of the impacted 
rights, but also when that data is being assessed, evaluated, and used to set protective WQS. Thus, in 
addition to amending proposed provision 40 C.F.R. § 131.6 (g) to require consideration of TEK 
when made available by tribes as outlined above, EPA should consider releasing robust guidance on 
what data sources are relevant to this inquiry and how these sources of information should be 
balanced and weighed to determine the appropriate action to take. 
 
64 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,369. 
65 Id. 
66 See 16 U.S.C. § 1532.  
67 See id. at § 1535. 
68 Yurok Tribe et al. v. U.S. Bureau of Reclamation et al., No. 19-cv-04405-WHO, 2023 WL 1785278 (N.D. Cal. Feb 6, 2023); 
See also Baley, 942 F.3d at 1335. 
69 87 Fed. Reg 74,368. 

 
 
Page 13 
 
 
 
In declining to set a national applicable threshold for unsuppressed levels or use of a 
resource, EPA cites to the National Environmental Justice Advisory Committee (NEJAC)'s 2002 
report, which notes that suppression effects may occur in two circumstances: (1) when a waterbody 
and the resources it supports become contaminated such that individuals refrain from consuming 
fish caught from the body of water, and (2) when fish populations are depleted from their historic 
quantities and species varieties such that individuals cannot catch or consume as many fish as “they 
had or would.”70 However, the NEJAC report also notes the “downward spiral” that may ensue if 
environmental standards permit further and further contamination or depletion of fish.71 For 
example, if WQS are set based “on a picture of exposure” that assumes current fish consumption 
rates of an impacted community will remain stable, when that rate includes suppression resulting 
from water quality or resource availability, agencies will “permit relatively greater quantities of 
pollutants to remain in or be discharged to the waters and sediments.”72 Thus, NEJAC recommends 
that EPA identify appropriate “baselines” reflecting higher levels of consumption to be employed 
when setting and approving WQS, taking into account historic, cultural, and aspirational interests of 
the impacted communities.73 
 
Given these concerns, the Yurok Tribe supports proposed 40 C.F.R. 131.9(a)(1), which 
requires that state and federal WQS protect tribal reserved rights at an unsuppressed level. As EPA 
aptly raises,74 for many, including the Yurok Tribe, in determining unsuppressed levels, what is 
reasonably achievable will not be the current fish consumption rate. Because “the snapshot of 
contemporary consumption practices provided by recent surveys arguably represents a nadir—a low 
point from which tribes are working to recover as environments are restored and traditional 
practices reinvigorated.”75 As such the Tribe emphasizes the point that EPA raises—that it is 
imperative that when states and EPA are determining an unsuppressed level, that they not only 
consider the legally protected nature of the tribal reserved right, but also past and future uses of the 
rights, including restoration efforts that are underway such as habitat restoration and mitigation 
efforts.  
 
While the Tribe supports the inclusion of historic data, of equal or even greater importance 
in some aquatic ecosystems are models of future projected water quality and ecosystem functioning 
following restoration efforts. For example, with the impending removal of dams on the Klamath 
River, historic habitat areas for salmon and other aquatic species for which historic data may not 
exist will become available for repopulation. For such areas, the only potentially relevant data may be 
from models projecting how dam removal will affect their hydrology and ecology. Thus, it is 
imperative that states and EPA utilize such data in determining whether water quality standards set 
 
70 Nat’l Env’t Just. Advisory Council, Fish Consumption and Environmental Justice, p.44, 46 (2002), https:/ 
lwww.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-02/documents/fish-consump-report _ 1102.pdf. 
71 Id. at 44. 
72 Id. at 46; see also id. at 43-49.  
73 Id. at 49. 
74 Id. 
75 Catherine A. O'Neill, Fishable Waters, 1 Am. Indian L.J. 181, 217 (2013), 
https://digitalcommons.law.seattleu.edu/faculty/306; see also id. at 216 (“Indeed, the forces of suppression, often 
perpetrated or permitted by federal and state governments, have included inundation of fishing places; depletion and 
contamination of the fishery resource; and years of prosecution, intimidation, and gear confiscation.”), 

 
 
Page 14 
 
 
for these areas will be sufficient. This is vastly preferable to utilizing only historic data, or worse, 
where no historic data exists, no data to determine the necessary water quality standards in these 
areas. Not using model outputs risks setting inadequate water quality standards that fail to protect 
reserved rights once restoration efforts are underway and such habitat areas are modified. Further, 
to the extent that certain data is unavailable, it is all the more important for EPA to provide funding 
and technical assistance to tribes to commission studies, modeling, and data analysis relevant to 
determining unsuppressed levels. It is imperative that both state and federal agencies establish a 
framework enabling direct payment to tribes for services rendered. Presently, there has been 
resistance towards compensating the Yurok Tribe directly for their contributions in providing 
services that benefit the general public. It is crucial that a mechanism be established to facilitate this 
process. 
 
When unsuppressed levels are determined, Yurok encourages EPA to ensure more 
protective WQS are established, taking into account historic, cultural, and aspirational interests of 
the tribes to avoid further depletion and contamination of tribal resources. Yurok hopes close 
consultation between tribes, EPA, and states as this regulatory framework is implemented and as 
states begin the process of reviewing their WQS for compliance with the proposed regulation will 
help achieve this outcome. Consultation is key to ensure the rights of tribal communities are 
protected.  
 
C. In Furtherance of Protecting Tribal Subsistence Fishing, EPA Should Set a Mandatory 
Risk of Cancer Rate of at least 10-6 
Proposed 40 CFR 131.9(a)(2), requires that the “health of the right holders to at least the 
same risk level as provided to the general population of the State.”76 EPA explains that it anticipates 
this provision would mean that the appropriate cancer risk level for the general population, of “at 
least 10−5 along with a fish consumption rate that reflects the reserved right,” would apply when 
determining human health criteria.77 The Yurok Tribe respectfully suggests that such a proposed 
acceptable risk level is not sufficiently stringent.  The Tribe agrees with EPA’s determination that 
tribes exercising their rights should not be considered “highly exposed” subgroups based on their 
increased rates of fish consumption, which would mean a higher acceptable risk of cancer level of 
10-4  under EPA’s 2000 methodology.78 However, as proposed by EPA, states are left with the option 
of setting an acceptable risk of cancer level of either 10-5 (or one in 100,000) or 10-6 (one in one 
million) for tribes exercising their rights. EPA should instead mandate a higher protection for tribal 
populations by requiring that states use at least a 10-6 risk level when setting WQS in bodies of water 
that impact tribal reserved rights, either directly or because the tribal reserved rights are located 
downstream.  
 
EPA calculates ambient water quality criteria at a 10-6 (one in one million) cancer risk level 
for the general population, which the agency views as “appropriate for the general population.”79 
And while EPA may accept higher levels of risk (10-5), EPA should impose standards that would 
 
76 87 Fed. Reg. at 74,378.   
77 Id. at 74,369.  
78 EPA, Methodology for Deriving Ambient Water Quality Criteria for the Protection of Human Health 2-6 (2000) 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2018-10/documents/methodology-wqc-protection-hh-2000.pdf. 
79 Id. at 1-8. 

Page 15 
protect tribal members who exercise tribal reserved rights, and in particular those who exercise 
subsistence living, to the highest extent possible.  This would be in line with EPA’s long held view 
that fish consumers at higher risk of exposure to certain carcinogens may warrant increased 
protection.80 As such, the Tribe suggests adding the following language to 40 C.F.R. § 131.9(a)(2): 
§ 131.9 Protection of tribal reserved rights.
(a) Water quality standards must protect tribal reserved rights applicable to waters
subject to such standards. To protect tribal reserved rights, water quality standards
must, to the extent supported by available data and information, be established to
protect:
…
(2) The health of the right holders to at least the same risk level as provided to the
general population of the State, provided that the cancer risk level used in deriving
human health water quality criteria for carcinogens where there are applicable
tribal reserved rights is not greater than 10-6 (one in one million).
*** 
The Yurok Tribe appreciates the opportunity to comment on the proposed rule to review 
WQS regulations at 40 C.F.R Part 131, to require state and federal WQS to protect tribal reserved 
rights to aquatic and aquatic-dependent resources. With the recommendations included above, this 
proposal is consistent with the Biden-Harris Administration's commitment to tribal communities in 
addressing continuing threats to human health and the environment. We look forward to engaging 
with the EPA for further consultation. Please contact Melodie Meyer (mmeyer@yuroktribe.nsn.us) 
and Alexander Mesher (amesher@yuroktribe.nsn.us) with any questions about the points raised in 
this letter. 
Wok-hlew’,  
Joseph L. James 
Yurok Tribe Chairman 
80 Water Quality Standards; Establishment of Numeric Criteria for Priority Toxic Pollutants; States’ Compliance, 57 Fed. 
Reg. 60848, 60849 (Dec. 22, 1992) (recognizing that “carcinogens that bioaccumulate, particularly given the exposure of 
fishermen to such carcinogens, may justify a more protective risk level of 10-6 for the average fish consumer”).
