
--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0137 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
Clean Source August 2024 
 
 
Feature Article: 
 
Survival of the Fittest, Critical Cleaning, and EPA Amended TSCA Rules - Coping with 
Change 
 
Barbara Kanegsberg and Ed Kanegsberg, BFK Solutions LLC 
 
Note: Analysis and comments reﬂect the status as of August 31, 2024. Speciﬁcally, a ﬁnal rule for 
MC has been issued and proposed rules for PCE, TCE and nPB (1-BP) have been published. These 
analyses and comments are self-funded by BFK Solutions.  
 
“Survival of the ﬁttest” is a tenet of Charles Darwin’s evolution of species. Many United 
States manufacturers requiring critical product cleaning must develop survival strategies 
and tactics. One immediate source of this existential crisis are new and impending 
regulations from U.S. EPA Amended TSCA. The regulations restrict or even prohibit use of 
certain eWective, aggressive chlorinated and brominated solvents in vapor degreasing and 
related activities. The most recent update is the proposed rule to manage n-propyl bromide 
(nPB). Manufacturers have only until September 23 to comment. Be aware that EPA refers 
not to nPB but to 1-bromopropane (1-BP). Manufacturers who want to survive should 
peruse the proposed 1-BP rule.  Manufacturers who use or who have suppliers of 
components or product with cleaning processes that depend on Methylene Chloride (MC), 
Perchloroethylene (PCE) or Trichloroethylene (TCE) should peruse the 1-BP rule. The 
proposed rule provides possible paths forward for manufacturers. Understanding all the 
rules, all the diWerent EPA strategies, will enhance your ability as a manufacturer to be 
among the “survival of the ﬁttest.” What does “ﬁttest” mean? In Darwinian terms, ﬁttest 

does not mean the strongest; ﬁttest does not mean the most intelligent. Fittest means the 
“most adaptable to change.”  How might manufacturers adapt to changes impelled by EPA 
regulations? How much change is needed? What are the costs?  In this article we discuss 
the proposed nPB (1-BP) rule AND compare it with the ﬁnal rule for MC and the proposed 
rules for TCE and PCE. As principals at BFK Solutions, we intend to submit our comments to 
the 1-BP (nPB) docket. 
 
nPB  (1-BP)  
On August 8, 2024, the Proposed Rule, “1-Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the Toxic 
Substances Control Act (TSCA)”, was published in the Federal Register (1). Under the 
proposed rule, everyone using nPB must change their cleaning processes or certify that 
their current processes meet EPA requirements. The primary concern with nPB, and with 
the other three solvents under consideration is worker exposure, not environmental 
releases.  
 
Staying below the worker exposure limit will be much more diWicult than meeting an OSHA 
standard. The reason is that a few years back, the U.S. Congress passed what is usually 
referred to as “Lautenberg”(2) with bipartisan support. Under Lautenberg, EPA was tasked 
with eliminating “unreasonable risk” to not only to the environment but also to workers. EPA 
has established an Existing Chemical Exposure Level (ECEL). The ECEL is very diWerent from 
limits set by OSHA or AGCIH (3) (Table 1).  For a few, particularly those using nPB sealed, 
reduced pressure solvent systems, survival adaptation may be no more than providing a 
required “self-certiﬁcation” that they currently meet EPA requirements for worker exposure. 
However, meeting those requirements is likely to be very challenging for most users.  
 
Table 1: Exposure levels for halogenated solvents 
 
 

nPB would be allowed in vapor degreasers. The ECEL for N-propyl bromide is 0.05 ppm.  EPA 
asserts that a level of 0.05 ppm could be achieved. Frankly, based on our experience and 
because most manufacturers use nPB open-top degreasers, we ﬁnd this blanket assertion 
to be – what’s the word? Curious, aspirational, perhaps unrealistic. The assertion that ECEL 
can be reached in most situations is not realistic. Certainly, there could be a few situations 
where the EPA assertion is viable. For example, in a small R&D group or a manufacturer with 
very low product throughput, a small open-top vapor degreaser could be placed in an area 
remote from employees and used once or twice a day for no more than 1 to 2 minutes. 
 
Further, until recently, nPB was not listed as a hazardous air pollutant (HAP) and therefore 
did not have to be used in NESHAP compliant degreasers with increased freeboard. Spray 
wands are often used to access all surfaces of the part being cleaned. This means the 
employee is standing over the vapor degreaser and may spray solvent relatively close to 
their face. If the process is not automated, there will be high employee exposure. The levels 
achieved must be even lower than 0.05 ppm, because the proposed rule calls for an action 
level of 0.03 ppm. If the EPA has found examples of employee monitoring indicating 
successful control with open top degreasers, it would be enlightening for that data were to 
be made publicly available.  
 
We expect current nPB processes to be discontinued in most applications. Substitute 
processes would involve process change and/or chemical substitution. 
 
Sealed, reduced pressure cleaning systems 
Vapor degreasing in nPB ought not be prohibited. Assertions of compliance with an 
exceedingly low ECEL sets up false hope. The nPB proposed rule, and rules for MC, TCE, and 
PCE, should be revised to encourage and support cleaning process technology. The dream 
of solvent substitution as a solution is just that – a dream. Manufacturers use halogenated 
solvents not through ignorance or laziness but because they have the physical and 
chemical properties to clean eWectively. 
 
Rather than targeting individual chemicals one at a time, pathways to success ought to be 
suggested by EPA and encouraged by EPA. Manufacturers who make the signiﬁcant 
ﬁnancial investment in capital equipment, employee education, process development and 
process validation/veriﬁcation should be encouraged and rewarded. EPA should work with 
other agencies to develop incentivization programs.  
 
nPB and similar solvents can be used in sealed, reduced pressure cleaning machines (often 
referred to as airless/airtight systems). For decades (probably since the 1980s) such 
systems have been successful to minimize releases of volatile chemicals. Their use should 
be encouraged and rewarded by EPA. We implore EPA to develop and post a category for 
such systems, as opposed to using the incorrect and misleading terms likely “sealed, 
enclosed, or closed-loop.” EPA might consider such systems as examples of BACT (Best 
Available Controlled Technology); or EPA might prefer another acronym.  
 
EPA needs an accurate, encompassing deﬁnition for such systems, one that includes 
diWerences in design.  We refer Clean Source readers to our January 2024 article (4). One 
reason reduced pressure cleaning machines have not been recognized as adequate may be 
that those who manufacture or supply such systems seem to foster only their technology is 

acceptable. BFK Solutions has ZERO desire to head up an ASTM or ISO committee on the 
topic! Here is our fervent plea to providers of such systems: Stop (verbally) bashing each 
other over the head! Please stop saying only your technology works! In our observations, 
many similar technologies are acceptable. Help the EPA make critical product cleaning safe 
and eWective. 
 
Disparate regulatory approaches 
Assessments and rule development under EPA amended TSCA have proceeded during the 
same timeframe and presumably using the same approaches. The rules/proposed rules for 
MC, PCE, TCE and nPB ought to look relatively similar. They don’t! (See Table 2) 
 
Table 2: DiFerences, regulation of halogenated solvents 
Solvent 
Rule Status 
(date) 
ECEL 
(ppm) 
Boil 
temp 
(C) 
Vapor degreasing allowed? 
Methylene 
Chloride (MC) 
Final  
April 2024 
2 
40 
• NO 
• extended time for some NASA and  
defense uses with WCPP* 
• self certiﬁcation NOT proposed 
Perchloroethylene 
(PCE) 
Proposed 
June 2023 
0.14 
121 
• Yes with WCPP* 
• self certiﬁcation NOT proposed 
Trichloroethylene 
(TCE) 
Proposed 
Oct. 2023 
0.003 
87 
• NO 
• extended time for some NASA and 
defense uses with WCPP* 
• self certiﬁcation NOT proposed 
1-Bromopropane 
(1-BP, nPB) 
Proposed 
July 2024 
0.05 
71 
• Yes with WCPP*,  
• self certiﬁcation proposed 
*Workplace Chemical Protection Program 
 
As we will explain, the compliance pathway in the proposed rule for nPB is quite diWerent 
and clashes with rules or proposed rules for MC, PCE, and TCE. Manufacturers who use MC, 
PCE, or TCE or who have suppliers using MC, PCE, or TCE should immediately comment 
about nPB and request harmonized, reasonable, and achievable rules for those solvents.  
 
Harmonized rules are a must 
The proposed rule for nPB handles solvent management and employee exposure in a far 
diWerent manner than to analogous rules/proposed rules for MC, TCE, and PCE. In fact, 
each of the four rules take a diWerent approach. Manufacturers will ﬁnd adapting to the new 
rules to be more accessible if the rules resemble each other. 
 
The ECEL for methylene chloride (MC) is 2 ppm – that’s 40 time higher than the ECEL for 
nPB. The ﬁnal rule for MC categorically and, to us illogically, prohibits MC in vapor 
degreasers, not even in reduced pressure sealed systems. Granted, MC has a STEL (short 
term exposure limit). The presence of a STEL should not in and of itself be a barrier to using 
MC. To de facto prohibit such use seems to us to be an unwarranted example of in loco 
parentis for adult workers. 

 
The ECEL for PCE is 0.14 ppm – that’s 2.8 times higher than nPB.  The proposed rule for PCE 
does not provide a similar expectation that manufacturers could comply with the ECEL in 
vapor degreasing, even though one might expect lower emissions because the boiling point 
of PCE is somewhat higher than that of nPB, and even though, as a NESHAP solvent, PCE 
tends to be used in more modern, less-emissive degreasers.   
 
The ECEL for TCE is exceedingly low, 0.06 that of nPB.  Vapor degreasing with TCE is 
generally prohibited, with an extended time for some NASA uses. WCPP self-certiﬁcation is 
not proposed. It seems to us illogical to prohibit use of TCE, without providing a mechanism 
to demonstrate eWectiveness appropriate engineering controls. Also, extended time 
exemptions of up to 10 years for NASA and defense uses seems highly unreasonable to us. 
Accepting that TCE is so highly dangerous, the lives of people working at NASA and at 
certain defense contractors should not be put in danger. If NASA and defense contractors 
can control exposure to TCE, why can’t the rest of us? And why does there have to be a 10 
year phaseout time?  In addition, why should only “the big guys” get extensions. Small 
medical device manufacturers also provide product that is “safety-critical”. We discuss 
“safety-critical” and other categories of cleaning a bit further down in this article. 
 
Inﬂuence change; adapt to change 
We think manufacturers should take advantage of the opportunity to make comments to 
the EPA about all four solvents. Based on our interpretation of the proposed rule for 1-BP, 
the mechanism for making comments appears in Section VIII of the proposed 1-BP rule. In 
Section VIII, the ECEL for not only nPB about also for the other 3 solvents would be 
formalized in a diWerent EPA document, including solvents where the comment period has 
passed and even where a ﬁnal rule has been issued. We suggest that the rule for MC should 
be considered as cast not in concrete but in wet, mushy concrete – or, at least that’s what 
should happen. All you folks ought to speak up right away, to better protect the 
environment, employees, and U.S. manufacturing! 
 
Changes in the cleaning processes are inevitable for many manufacturers. Changes may be 
impelled by new, more stringent customer demands on product quality or product 
performance. This includes new standards limiting contamination level. Becoming the 
ﬁttest may involve becoming more cost-eWective by replacing old, ineWicient cleaning 
equipment with cost-eWective processes that achieve reliable cleaning.   
 
Considerations associated with amended TSCA activities include the costs and aggravation 
in evaluating new equipment and developing and validating new cleaning processes.  Your 
company or your customers’ company may institute policies that go beyond the EPA 
proposals and rules. Corporate policy may ban even a whisper of certain chemicals. 
Particularly with complex supply chains, “equivalent” cleaning processes that don’t really 
work as well may replace the tried-and-true aggressive solvents. This is exacerbated by the 
fact that chemical suppliers may elect to cease U.S. production; we have already seen this 
with trichloroethylene. 
 
Regrettable substitution 
In the 1-BP proposed rule, we ﬁnd a single use of the phrase “regrettable substitution” 
(Section IV(A)1biii). Most people consider the concept of “regrettable substation to be using 

an alternative chemical that then becomes subject to safety/environmental investigation. 
Flashpoint-inerted trans-DCE azeotropic blends contain chemicals that are or may be 
considered PFAS; and trans-DCE is itself under scrutiny by EPA amended TSCA.  How long 
will they be available? Who knows.  Given these considerations, these blends often 
considered a short-term substitute. They could be part of a good survival strategy 
depending on performance and the eWort needed to validate the new process. Substitute 
chemicals and processes come with other risks to employee safety; and those risks are not 
suWiciently outlined or addressed. Flammability is a real issue. It can be managed. 
However, improperly handled, there can be risks to people and property. Many substitute 
chemicals and chemical blends have not been adequately studied. 
 
Cleanliness categories – consequences of not cleaning 
Other substitute chemicals are dissimilar to nPB, MC, TCE, and PCE.  In general, the more 
dissimilar the chemical, the more process development will be needed. The regulations for 
the four solvents are so burdensome to most manufacturers that not-in-kind substitutes 
require more cleanliness and materials compatibility testing than do more closely related 
solvents. Examples of not in-kind substitutes relative the four halogenated solvents include 
hydrocarbons, modiﬁed alcohol, isopropyl alcohol, water and aqueous blends, HFEs and 
HFOs used without trans-DCE, d-limonene as well as “chemical free” processes (eg. steam, 
laser, or plasma cleaning).  
 
Particularly with not-in-kind substitutes, adaptation changes in the cleaning process that 
are impelled by EPA amended TSCA require substantial eWort and investment. The amount 
of cleaning process development and testing depends on the negative impact of 
inadequate cleaning or not cleaning on the ultimate produce. Investment in new processes 
includes substantial testing for cleanliness veriﬁcation/validation.  
 
When we teach or help clients, we often explain that process development, cleanliness 
testing, cleaning process validation is particularly crucial in areas where public safety, 
defense capability, and patient safety are issues. Some people refer to this type of cleaning 
as “Where Failure is Not an Option.” Because our background includes defense, aerospace, 
pharma, and medical device manufacturing, we teach the category where “if you don’t 
clean it right, airplanes and missiles fall out of the sky and patient’s asses fall oW.” EPA has 
wisely chosen the far more elegant term “Safety/Critical Cleaning.” In the safety/critical 
category, unintended consequences to the product include ineWective unacceptable 
residue. Unintended consequences also include unforeseen, undesirable interaction with 
materials of construction and, in the case of medical devices with human biological 
systems. 
 
Back in what we fondly recall as “The Great Freon Festival”, the EPA Signiﬁcant New 
Alternative Policy (SNAP) Program was instituted to address use of Ozone-depleting 
Substances (ODS) that were phased out due to the Montreal Protocol agreement. The SNAP 
program, which is wide ranging and is active today, covers diverse areas like aerosols, 
refrigerants, ﬁre suppressants, and cleaning. Under SNAP there are three cleaning 
categories, Metals Cleaning, Electronics Cleaning and Precision Cleaning. The three 
cleaning categories reﬂect the era when what became SNAP was being developed (starting 
in the 1980s). in the nPB economic analysis, EPA includes four categories of cleaning in the 
Economic Analysis Section 7.7 of the Economic Analysis for 1-BP (6) 

 
We use a similar approach in teaching cleaning to students, practicing engineers, and 
professionals in process cleaning. We teach these four categories of cleaning (Table 3); 
more details are available in a publicly available webinar (5) 
 
We suggest that the four categories be included in the ﬁnal rule for 1-BP and in any revisions 
of rules for MC, TCE, and PCE. One reason is to avoid the consequences of “regrettable 
substitution” and “unintended consequences.”  We suggest that “self-certiﬁcation” by 
solvent users should include the category(ies) to which they need to clean as well as how 
they are approaching the requirements of the rule. We suggest that manufacturers requiring 
safety/critical cleaning be provided with additional time to comply with the regulation. We 
suggest that it is counterproductive and in our humble opinion dangerous to public safety 
and patient safety to push those manufacturers toward solvent substitution. The risks of 
“regrettable substitution” and “unintended consequences” are simply unacceptable! 
 
Table 3: Cleaning categories 
Cleaning Category 
Major features 
General cleaning 
• Preliminary cleaning 
• Gross soil removal 
• Visual inspection suZicient 
• Little to no testing required 
Precision cleaning 
• Failure costs money 
• Consistency required 
• Cleaning validation required 
Safety-critical cleaning 
• Failure is not an option 
• Examples of product failure: airplanes drop out of 
the sky and people’s tushes fall oZ 
• Extensive testing, validation, veriﬁcation required 
• Retesting needed for process change 
Developmental (R&D) 
• Research, prototype 
• Cleaning process must be “scalable” 
 
Adaptation 
Adaptation is the key to survival. Here are some ﬁnal thoughts. 
• 
Be vigilant – be aware of impending changes. 
 
• 
Submit comments to the EPA. 
 
• 
Change the cleaning process methodically and logically. 
o Use a team with the appropriate expertise, in-house and external.  
o Be educated about the pros and cons of alternative cleaning processes.  
o Run cleaning tests on your product. This includes waste management and 
cleanliness testing.   
o Estimate the full costs of process conversion. Set up a budget. We almost 
guarantee you will underestimate the degree of eWort (7).  

 
• 
Change your manufacturing plan to something that does not require cleaning. 
 
• 
Move your manufacturing facility overseas. This adaptation comes with a high cost.  
 
Some adaptations are unwise 
§ 
Ignore the problem; and hope someone else solves it for you. This is unlikely in 
the long term. It’s more likely that bigger companies will move to areas in the 
world with less stringent regulations. 
• Expect large companies and the military to protect you.  “Special treatment” is 
evanescent and unreliable. Large entities protect themselves. 
 
§ 
Pick a cleaning process based only on sales claims. Don’t run cleaning tests. 
 
§ 
Assume that it won’t cost that much to change 
 
§ 
Stop manufacturing. This is a great strategy if you are independently wealthy 
and/or ready to retire.  
 
For over 30 years, BFK Solutions has been helping manufacturers to adapt their cleaning 
processes in order to survive in this rapidly changing and challenging environment.  
 
References 
1. https://www.regulations.gov/docket/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471/document , Docket  
EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0032 
2. Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act, 
https://www.epa.gov/assessing-and-managing-chemicals-under-
tsca/frank-r-lautenberg-chemical-safety-21st-century-act  
3. B. Kanegsberg and E. Kanegsberg, “Degreasing and Fireworks”, Clean Source July 
2022, https://bfksolutions.com/degreasing-and-ﬁreworks/  
4. B. Kanegsberg and E. Kanegsberg, “Degreasers”, Clean Source January 2024, 
https://bfksolutions.com/degreasers/ 
5. B. Kanegsberg, E. Kanegsberg, and D. Williams, Product Quality Cleaning 
Workshops (PQCW) webinar, Feb. 8, 2022, 
https://mailchi.mp/f358f1fd84c7/pqcwebinar-on-epa  
6. US EPA, OPPT, “Economic Analysis of the Proposed Regulation of 1-Bromopropane 
Under TSCA Section 6(a)”, RIN 2070-AK73, Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0114. 
7. B. Kanegsberg and E. Kanegsberg, “What Can Go Wrong?”, presentation to The 
Surface Finishers Educational Association (SFEA), Nov. 11, 2021; 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m1Pp06grbvk

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0130 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
September 11, 2024 
 
To Whom it May Concern; 
 
I am writing to comment on the EPA’s proposed regulation for use of 1-bromopropane as a 
laboratory chemical under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) (Docket ID EPA-HQ-OPPT-
2020-0471). While I appreciate the EPA’s efforts to protect public health and close existing 
regulatory gaps, I believe the proposed rule has not considered the nature of laboratory 
operations. It is, therefore, poorly tailored and creates an unnecessary regulatory and economic 
burden. 
EPA should align its requirements for laboratory use of hazardous chemicals, including 1-
bromopropane, more closely with OSHA’s Laboratory Standard. EPA should develop a common 
regulatory approach to mitigating the risks of chemical exposures in laboratories, and apply that 
approach to all chemicals for which EPA has regulated, is currently proposing to regulate, or may 
regulate in the future, under TSCA. 
Shortcomings of Existing Regulation 
To date, the use of hazardous chemicals in laboratories has been regulated primarily by OSHA’s 
Laboratory Standard (29 CFR 1910.1450). This represents a significant improvement for 
laboratories over previous OSHA regulations including the Hazard Communication Standard and 
substance-specific regulations in 29 CFR 1910 Subpart Z. However, while the Laboratory 
Standard has been beneficial, OSHA’s regulations fail to protect non-employees (e.g. students 
working in academic labs) and many public-sector employees. This is a notable gap that EPA 
can, should, and has begun to address in recent rulemakings under TSCA. It is crucial that any 
changes in the final rule maintain this advantage over the existing OSHA regulation. This will 
ensure a more comprehensive and up-to-date approach to safety in laboratories, benefiting all 
who work within them. 
Common Approach to Chemical Regulation Aligned with OSHA Standards 
EPA should develop a common approach to mitigating the risks of chemical exposures in 
laboratories and apply this approach to all chemicals regulated under TSCA. This would reduce 
the paperwork and economic burdens on laboratories, which use hundreds to thousands of 
chemicals. A single, holistic Chemical Hygiene Plan is more effective than a multitude of chemical-
specific compliance programs. 
A unified approach would not only streamline compliance but also enhance safety by providing a 
consistent framework for managing chemical risks. Laboratories are dynamic environments 
where the introduction of new chemicals and procedures is routine. A common regulatory 
approach would allow laboratories to adapt more swiftly and effectively to new regulations, 
ensuring that safety measures are always up-to-date and comprehensive. Aligning with OSHA’s 
Laboratory Standard (29 CFR 1910.1450) would ensure that the regulations are practical and 
relevant to the actual conditions in which 1-bromopropane is used in laboratories. 

To date, EPA’s proposed and final rulemakings under TSCA have not followed a consistent 
framework. For example, the final rule for methylene chloride requires laboratory operators to 
maintain records of “Personal protective equipment (PPE) and respiratory protection used by 
potentially exposed persons,” whereas the proposed rules for perchloroethylene and carbon 
tetrachloride require that these records include “the name, workplace address, work shift, job 
classification, and work area of each person … and the type of PPE selected to be worn by each 
of these persons” as well as “The basis for specific PPE selection.” EPA’s proposed rule for NMP 
introduced a requirement that operators post prescriptive signage on regulated areas that was 
not included in previous rulemakings. EPA’s proposed rules for carbon tetrachloride, 
perchloroethylene, and NMP each require operators to develop direct dermal contact controls 
(DDCC), which is not present in the proposed rule for 1-bromopropane, despite the requirement 
to provide for dermal protection. The present proposed rule would also introduce several novel 
requirements not previously included in EPA’s TSCA rulemaking, including the proposed self-
certification requirement, and prohibition against releases caused by implementation of 
engineering controls. 
While these variations in requirements may be insignificant for operators of facilities that use a 
single chemical regulated under TSCA, they dramatically increase the economic burden of 
compliance for laboratories that may use all of them. 
EPA should develop a common approach to mitigating the risks of chemical exposures in 
laboratories and apply this approach to all chemicals regulated under TSCA. 
Use of 1-Bromopropane as a Laboratory Chemical 
EPA’s determination that 1-bromopropane poses an unreasonable risk when used as a laboratory 
chemical was not based on exposure data associated with laboratory use (EPA Document #740-
R1-8013, page 123). EPA chose to use exposure data from aerosol degreasing as the basis for 
estimating exposures from laboratory use of 1-bromopropane. However, no data or evidence 
have been provided to support a claim that aerosol exposures are a valid proxy for laboratory 
exposures. There are several reasons to believe that they are not. EPA’s schematic of the Near-
Field/Far-Field Model for Aerosol Degreasing (EPA Document #740-R1-8013, page 107) shows 
a worker applying a 1-bromopropane aerosol to a part ~18” from their face, without any 
engineering control present. Laboratory use of chemicals, however, involves chemicals contained 
in process vessels, which are manipulated in chemical fume hoods that separate the user from 
those chemicals by means of a sash and inward airflow. Further evidence that laboratory use of 
1-bromopropane does not involve aerosol application can be found in the products marketed to 
laboratories. MilliporeSigma (product IDs B78106 and 8.01667), Thermo Fisher Scientific 
Chemicals (product ID A10461), TCI America (product ID B0638), and Spectrum Chemical 
(product ID B1157) all sell 1-bromopropane for laboratory use. All of those products are liquids in 
glass bottles at atmospheric pressure. None are aerosol containers. 
EPA did obtain exposure data for a use of 1-bromopropane that is a viable proxy for laboratory 
use – processing as a reactant. According to EPA’s risk evaluation, this is “the use of 1-BP as a 
raw material in the production of another chemical, in which 1-BP is reacted and consumed.” This 
is the predominant use of 1-bromopropane in laboratories. The primary factor that distinguishes 
processing as a reactant from laboratory use is scale – laboratory use involves vessels that can 
be easily manipulated by a single person and quantities that can be transferred between vessels 
using handheld containers as opposed to the multi-ton scales that may be used in industrial 

chemical facilities. Therefore, while it is accurate to suggest that laboratory exposures may be as 
high as industrial processing as a reactant depending on the use volume, engineering control, 
and PPE, it is not accurate to suggest that laboratory exposures may be as high as exposures 
from aerosol degreasing. The exposure data for processing 1-bromopropane as a reactant had 
central tendencies of 3.83 x 10-3 ppm and 1.52 x 10-3 ppm, both of which are below the proposed 
ECEL. 
If EPA continues to base its risk estimate for laboratory use of 1-bromopropane on 
exposures from aerosol degreasing, it should define laboratory use to include only aerosol 
processes, and should only require implementation of a Workplace Chemical Protection 
Plan for laboratories that use 1-bromopropane as an aerosol. 
WCPP Framework 
The current proposed rule requires a Workplace Chemical Protection Plan (WCPP) that includes 
Direct Dermal Contact Controls for 1-bromopropane. While this appears to offer flexibility, the 
requirements for the WCPP are not well-suited to laboratory operations. Laboratories use 1-
bromopropane in a wide variety of operations, often in small quantities. 
Laboratories frequently handle 1-bromopropane in volumes ranging from 0.1 to 500 mL. The 
chemical is typically both stored and used inside of various containers and vessels, and is 
transferred between containers using handheld equipment such as syringes, cannulas, or funnels. 
The vessels themselves are manipulated within controlled environments such as fume hoods or 
glove boxes. These methods and settings inherently minimize the risk of direct dermal contact. 
This stands in stark contrast to industrial applications where 1-bromopropane might be used in 
larger quantities, in more open environments, and in applications such as coatings or adhesive 
removers that increase risk of direct dermal contact. In other industrial settings such as 
manufacturing the use of 1-bromopropane might involve continuous processes that are highly 
engineered and are performed consistently for many years. 
The WCPP framework is identical for industries with well-defined, consistent operations and for 
laboratories with diverse, variable operations. This one-size-fits-all approach is inappropriate for 
laboratories, which may only perform specific operations once and handle 1-bromopropane 
exclusively in containers, making direct dermal contact unlikely. Clarifying the definition of direct 
dermal contact in the context of laboratory operations would help ensure that the regulations are 
appropriately targeted and do not impose unnecessary burdens on laboratory personnel. 
EPA should adopt a Laboratory Standard under TSCA that requires development of a 
single, holistic Workplace Chemical Protection Plan rather than require development of a 
multitude of distinct chemical-specific Workplace Chemical Protection Plans. 
Use of the Hierarchy of Controls 
The hierarchy of controls is a useful framework for structuring assessments of risk mitigations. 
However, documenting its use in each operation is not useful. As highlighted previously, 
laboratories are dynamic environments which frequently introduce new chemicals, and may only 
perform a specific operation a single time. While it may be sensible to document the rationale for 
eschewing elimination or substitution of 1-bromopropane in a manufacturing plant, to do so for 
every operation performed in a laboratory simply generates excessive paperwork. 

Any requirement to incorporate the hierarchy of controls should clarify that operators of 
laboratories will be permitted to satisfy such requirement by incorporating general 
provisions that apply across all operations into their existing documentation (e.g. a 
Chemical Hygiene Plan). 
Prohibition Against Increased Releases 
EPA is requesting comment on how the proposed requirement that owners or operators attest 
that the engineering controls selected do not increase emissions of 1-bromopropane to ambient 
air outside of the workplace may impact the availability, feasibility, or cost of engineering controls 
as a means to reduce workplace exposures to or below the proposed ECEL.  
The predominant form of engineering control employed in laboratories is the chemical fume hood. 
This proposal would significantly decrease the availability and feasibility of using fume hoods to 
control 1-bromopropane exposures, by significantly increasing the cost and complexity of 
constructing and operating fume hood systems. Existing chemical fume hoods are typically not 
equipped with any equipment to capture contaminants. Therefore, existing fume hoods would not 
be available to laboratory workers if this rule were implemented. In some cases, it may be possible 
over time to install appropriate scrubbers, but that will not be possible for all fume hoods. Chemical 
fume hoods are used to capture a wide range of acidic, basic, and organic vapors and gases, as 
well as organic and inorganic particulates. This is particularly true for manifolded fume hood 
systems. No technology exists which would be capable of efficiently and effectively removing such 
a broad range of contaminants, or of capturing 1-bromopropane in the presence of those other 
contaminants. Any equipment installed to remove contaminants from exhaust gases will take up 
physical space, increase the weight that must be supported by the building, and will require energy 
to run. Each of these will be compounded by the need to replace existing blower motors with 
larger models that consume more energy to compensate for the added flow restriction from the 
treatment equipment. Where these conditions can be satisfied, the installed equipment would also 
generate significant quantities of hazardous waste in the form of contaminated filters or scrubbing 
liquid. 
EPA is requesting comment on the types and costs of technologies firms would adopt to comply 
with the prohibition on increased releases of 1-bromopropane to outdoor air associated with 
engineering controls used in the implementation of the WCPP. The most likely technology that 
operators of laboratories would first implement would be a venturi scrubber. The cost of this is 
difficult to estimate within the timeframe allotted for comment. Laboratory fume hood systems may 
have flow rates ranging from 600 cfm to over 200,000 cfm, and may be used to exhaust gases 
that require varying materials of construction. An operator of laboratories might have upwards of 
1200 chemical fume hoods. This would equate to approximately 900,000 cfm of exhaust. 
According to EPA’s Air Pollution Control Technology Fact Sheet for Venturi Scrubbers (EPA-
452/F-03-017), and adjusted to 2024 dollars (using the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ CPI Inflation 
Calculator), installation and operation of venturi scrubbers on all chemical fume hoods could have 
an annualized cost of over $308 million, not including the cost for treatment and disposal of 
generated waste or of upgrading existing fume hood blower motors.  
The benefit this would provide remains unproven. EPA’s risk evaluation for 1-bromopropane 
found that it does not present an unreasonable risk of injury to health (general population). EPA 
did not evaluate risks to the general population from ambient air and disposal pathways for any 

conditions of use. This absence of data does not establish a basis for imposing such a costly 
requirement on operators of laboratories. 
EPA should not implement the proposal to prohibit releases of 1-bromopropane to outdoor 
air, nor should EPA require operators of laboratories to conduct monitoring for the 
purpose of identifying increases in emissions. Failing that, EPA should clarify that, for 
laboratories, the continued use of fume hoods does not constitute an increased release of 
1-bromopropane to outdoor air. 
Restricted Areas and Warning Signs 
EPA has requested comment on designation of “restricted areas” and on warning signage for the 
same. OSHA’s General Industry Standard for Beryllium (29 CFR 1910.1024(m)(2)) is offered as 
a potential model for these requirements. 
EPA should carefully consider the current and future scope of rulemaking under TSCA, and how 
those rules will apply cumulatively to laboratories when crafting any such requirements. In a 
typical laboratory, the entire lab room would typically be considered the regulated area. Numerous 
chemicals are used in various experiments, and the set of chemicals in simultaneous use changes 
daily. A typical academic organic chemistry laboratory can keep between 2000 and 5000 unique 
chemicals on hand. It is entirely foreseeable, therefore, that a single laboratory could be a 
regulated 
area 
for 
1-bromopropane, 
1,1-dichloroethane, 
1,1,2-trichloroethane, 
1,2-
dichloroethane, 1,2-dichloroethylene, 1,2-dichloropropane, 1,3-butadiene, 1,4-dioxane, multiple 
phthalates, acetaldehyde, acrylonitrile, aniline, carbon tetrachloride, ethylene dibromide, 
formaldehyde, 
methylene 
chloride, 
N-methylpyrrolidone, 
o-dichlorobenzene, 
octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane, 
p-dichlorobenzene, 
perchloroethylene, 
tris(2-chloroethyl) 
phosphate, and vinyl chloride. 
The warning sign required by §1910.1024(m)(2) reads: 
DANGER 
REGULATED AREA 
BERYLLIUM 
MAY CAUSE CANCER 
CAUSES DAMAGE TO LUNGS 
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY 
WEAR RESPIRATORY PROTECTION AND PERSONAL PROTECTIVE CLOTHING AND 
EQUIPMENT IN THIS AREA 
In order that it be legible, a sign containing this language would have to be at least the size of a 
3” x 5” index card. The foreseeable laboratory above could be required to post 345 sq. in. of 
signage containing nearly 600 words. It is not difficult to envision that chemical-intensive 
laboratories would eventually be physically unable to comply with all required postings as they 
would occupy a space larger than the area of the door. 
EPA should adopt a Laboratory Standard under TSCA that requires development of a 
single, holistic Workplace Chemical Protection Plan rather than require development of a 

multitude of distinct chemical-specific Workplace Chemical Protection Plans. This should 
include unified requirements for laboratory signage with sufficient flexibility to 
accommodate requirements imposed by other regulatory frameworks (e.g. OSHA, NFPA). 
Dermal Protection and Personal Protective Equipment Selection 
EPA is soliciting comments on the requirements proposed for appropriate PPE selection. EPA 
also requests comment on the degree to which additional guidance related to use of PPE might 
be appropriate.  
EPA’s proposed requirements for respiratory protection are appropriate, and should be enacted 
as proposed. EPA’s proposed requirements for dermal protection should be modified for 
laboratory use of 1-bromopropane. Dermal exposures to chemicals in laboratories occur 
predominantly through incidental splashes, not continuous contact. Chemicals are not used in 
sufficient quantities for a worker to immerse their hands, and they are not used outside of storage 
containers or process vessels. Gloves can also be changed frequently – it is common practice in 
laboratories to immediately doff and dispose of gloves that come in contact with a laboratory 
chemical, and replace them with a clean, unused pair. The small quantities of material utilized, 
and the smaller size of laboratory equipment which often requires fine manipulations, also elevate 
the need for manual dexterity in glove selection. Because of this, a lower level of protection is 
appropriate in laboratories than in other industrial uses of chemicals. The 8th edition of the 
Permeation/Degradation Resistance Guide for Ansell Chemical Resistant Gloves (Ansell Guide) 
is a useful source for information to support glove selection. While it shows that polyvinyl alcohol 
or laminate film gloves are undoubtedly good choices when handling 1-bromopropane, the Ansell 
Guide shows that viton/butyl gloves have a permeation breakthrough time of 182 minutes and 
nitrile gloves have a breakthrough time of 23 minutes. Either of these would afford a user sufficient 
time to replace their gloves in the event of a splash or spill without compromising safety. 
However, neither the Ansell Guide nor any other publicly available resource of which I’m aware 
provides information regarding protection against combinations of chemicals. The likely 
combinations of chemicals that laboratory workers may be reasonably expected to be exposed to 
when working with 1-bromopropane are functionally infinite. The scope of the Laboratory 
Standard is defined in part by the use of multiple chemicals or chemical procedures. Most of these 
combinations will not have been envisioned by glove manufacturers, and, therefore, will not have 
been tested. Glove selection must also account for non-chemical hazards such as heat and 
considerations such as the ability to manipulate equipment without slipping. These factors cannot 
be foreseen in advance for all cases making it unwise for glove materials to be specified in 
regulation. 
Glove selection requirements should allow for reliance on the professional judgment of 
Chemical Hygiene Officers and Certified Industrial Hygienists when selecting chemical 
protective gloves for use of 1-bromopropane. 
Self-Certification 
EPA requests comment on establishing a self-certification requirement, and/or reporting 
requirements, for purchasing and continued use of 1-BP or products containing 1-BP for certain 
conditions of use.  

The proposed self-certification requirement is a clear example of what safety scholars have 
termed “safety clutter”. (Rae, A. J., et al. (2018). Policy and Practice in Health and Safety, 16(2), 
194–211.) The signing of a self-certification statement will not improve the functioning of existing 
engineering controls or PPE. It’s even less clear what added safety value will be created by 
sending an additional copy of a self-certification to a vendor for each individual purchase of 1-
bromopropane. It will, however, increase the amount of paperwork required in order to purchase 
and use 1-bromopropane. At academic operators of laboratories, this will contribute to the 
problem of ‘administrative bloat’ (Weinstein Jr., P., Progressive Policy Institute, August 2023). 
This will be particularly acute for smaller academic operators of laboratories which do not currently 
employ a Certified Industrial Hygienist. If this provision were adopted in future rulemakings, as 
well, operators of laboratories would routinely find themselves having to submit multiple self-
certification statements attesting to the presence of the same controls in the same laboratories 
with each chemical purchase. 
EPA also seeks comment on whether, in future rulemakings, it should require reporting to EPA of 
the type of records specified in 40 CFR 751.815. 
A typical academic organic chemistry laboratory can keep between 2000 and 5000 unique 
chemicals on hand while biomedical laboratories often have between 200 and 500. It is entirely 
foreseeable, therefore, that a single laboratory could use 1-bromopropane, 1,1-dichloroethane, 
1,1,2-trichloroethane, 
1,2-dichloroethane, 
1,2-dichloroethylene, 
1,2-dichloropropane, 
1,3-
butadiene, 1,4-dioxane, multiple phthalates, acetaldehyde, acrylonitrile, aniline, carbon 
tetrachloride, ethylene dibromide, formaldehyde, methylene chloride, N-methylpyrrolidone, o-
dichlorobenzene, octamethylcyclotetrasiloxane, p-dichlorobenzene, perchloroethylene, tris(2-
chloroethyl) phosphate, and vinyl chloride. A requirement to submit records maintained pursuant 
to future TSCA rulemakings would rapidly become a requirement, in practice, to track and report 
each hazardous chemical used by each laboratory user. It will be economically burdensome for 
operators of academic laboratories to compile and report those records into a well-designed 
system. However, given that EPA’s current approach is to issue separate rulemakings for 
individual chemicals, it seems more likely that separate reports would have to be submitted for 
each regulated chemical, dramatically increasing the burden. EPA would also have to account for 
the fact that a record identifying the name and class period of a student taking a laboratory course 
likely qualifies as an educational record under FERPA, which strictly regulates disclosure of such 
information. 
EPA should not implement self-certification requirements, nor should EPA require 
duplicative submissions of such statements to chemical vendors. EPA should not require 
routine reporting of records of the type specified in 40 CFR 751.815 in this or in future 
rulemakings. 
Recordkeeping Requirements 
EPA proposes to require documentation of worker information that far exceeds that necessary to 
identify individual workers; specifically, “the name, workplace address, work shift, job 
classification, and work area of each person.” Academic operators of laboratories in particular will 
struggle to collect this information. Persons who may handle 1-bromopropane in university 
laboratories may be volunteers, visiting scholars, undergraduate students enrolled in laboratory 
courses, undergraduate students working as paid laboratory assistants, graduate students 
enrolled in laboratory courses, graduate students working as teaching assistants, graduate 

students working as paid laboratory researchers, graduate students receiving extramural 
fellowships, postdoctoral scholars, staff researchers, adjunct faculty, or tenured or tenure-track 
faculty. Each of those would represent a different job classification. Many researchers switch 
between classifications each academic period based on considerations that do not meaningfully 
impact the likelihood of exposure to 1-bromopropane (e.g. a graduate student who had been 
working as a paid researcher receiving an extramural fellowship). A single researcher may even 
switch between classifications within the same day (e.g. a graduate student who both works as a 
teaching assistant and who performs research towards their dissertation). Further complicating 
the issue of job classification within university laboratories is that universities commonly maintain 
information regarding students and employees within separate databases. 
Given the obstacles to satisfying the recordkeeping requirements including individual 
assignments, and demographic data contained the proposed rule, it could act as a de facto 
prohibition on the use of 1-bromopropane in academic laboratories. 
EPA should replace the current proposed recordkeeping requirements with language 
identical to OSHA’s Laboratory Standard and PPE Standard, except as necessary to 
account for the applicability of the proposed rule to non-employees. 
The proposed rule for 1-bromopropane is poorly tailored to laboratory use and creates an 
excessive economic burden. I urge the EPA to align its requirements more closely with OSHA’s 
Laboratory Standard and develop a common approach to chemical regulation that applies to all 
laboratory chemicals. This will ensure effective protection without imposing unnecessary burdens 
on laboratories. 
Thank you for your consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Christopher M. Kolodziej, Ph.D.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0148 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
Docket – EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
TURI O9icial Comments 1-BP 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
TOXICS USE REDUCTION INSTITUTE  
The Offices at Boott Mills West  
126 John Street, Suite 14 (2nd Floor)  
Lowell, MA  01852-1152  
(978) 934-3275    
www.turi.org  
____________________________________________________________________________________ 
 
TURI Comments on 1-Bromopropane (1-
BP) Rulemaking Under TSCA Section 6(a) 
 
Docket Number - EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
 
The Massachusetts Toxics Use Reduction Institute (TURI) offers the following comments in 
response to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) draft risk evaluation for 1-
Bromopropane (1-BP). These comments are provided in the context of TURI’s experience 
implementing the Massachusetts Toxics Use Reduction Act, Massachusetts General Laws chapter 
21I (TURA)1.   
 
Aspects of EPA’s draft risk evaluation are not consistent with the TURA program’s experience on 
protecting human and environmental health with respect to the use of 1-BP. In the draft risk 
evaluation, the potential harm of air emissions of 1-BP could be further addressed; certain 
assumptions are made regarding the effectiveness use of personal protective equipment (PPE); and 
the potential of well- developed safer alternatives to 1-BP could be better accounted for.  
 
TURI encourages EPA to consider these factors as it finalizes this risk management rule to ensure 
human health and the environment are protected from the adverse effects associated with 1-BP 
exposure. We believe further consideration of these factors would better promote the adoption of 
safer and more sustainable alternatives, which are currently available and accessible.  
 
1 MASSACHUSETTS TOXICS USE REDUCTION ACT - 
https://malegislature.gov/Laws/GeneralLaws/PartI/TitleII/Chapter21I 

Docket – EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
TURI O9icial Comments 1-BP 
 
 
 
 
2 
Background – The Massachusetts Toxics Use Reduction 
Act (TURA)   
 
TURA has unique reporting requirements that result in the collection of data, which other states 
and the federal government do not have. TURA requires large-quantity chemical users in the state 
to report annually on their use of certain toxic chemicals, pay an annual fee, and conduct toxics 
use reduction (TUR) planning every two years. In the TUR planning process, businesses examine 
opportunities to reduce toxic chemical use by adopting safer processes or inputs.    
 
The TURA program works from a number of core principles and approaches.  These include the 
following.   
 
• Focus on use:  The TURA program focuses on identifying the reasons why chemicals are 
used and wastes are generated. The focus is on protecting human and environmental health 
by reducing or eliminating the use of toxics wherever possible.    
• Focus on hazard:  TURA focuses on reducing or eliminating toxic or otherwise hazardous 
chemicals. There is no requirement to prove that exposure will occur, or to calculate risk, 
in order to take action to eliminate or reduce a hazard.    
• Protection of workers, consumers, and the environment:  TURA’s mandate is not only to 
prevent ambient environmental exposures resulting from industrial emissions, but also to 
take worker and consumer exposures into account.   
• Avoiding risk shifting:  TURA is intended to avoid transferring the risk of harm among 
groups of people or among environmental media. 
 
Effective January 2016, 1-BP was designated as a Higher Hazard Substance under TURA; this 
designation lowered the reporting threshold to 1,000 lbs./year. The Higher Hazard Substance 
designation under TURA provides a way to draw businesses’ attention to the chemicals of greatest 
concern and to ensure that these chemicals are prioritized in toxics use reduction efforts. In 
adopting this designation, the TURA program took account of existing data and the conclusions 
of authoritative bodies on both acute and chronic adverse health effects of 1-BP, including 
neurotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, reproductive and developmental toxicity, and carcinogenicity.  
Massachusetts Data on 1-BP Use and Releases 
 
Data collected under TURA may be useful in understanding the potential impacts of 1-BP. 1-BP 
was added to the TURA list of Toxic or Hazardous Substances in 2009, requiring facilities to begin 
reporting their use and release in 2010. Regularly reportable substances on the TURA list have 
reporting thresholds of 25,000 pounds for those manufactured or processed, and 10,000 pounds 
for those “otherwise used,” similar to the Toxics Release Inventory (TRI).  
 

Docket – EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
TURI O9icial Comments 1-BP 
 
 
 
 
3 
Figure 1 and Table 1 show 1-BP use and release in Massachusetts from 2010 to 2022, as reported 
under TURA.2  In 2010, the first year of reporting, three Massachusetts facilities reported the use 
of 1-BP and substantial releases to the environment. For example, one facility used 14,500 lbs. of 
1-BP, and released over 11,000 lbs. of 1-BP to the environment. The high release-to-use ratio may 
help to illustrate how the absence of regulatory attention can affect industry’s approach to using a 
toxic chemical throughout its lifecycle; if it has not been flagged as a concern by regulatory 
agencies. For example, workers may be less cautious in their handling of the chemical, or process 
design to reduce use and exposure may not be pursued. After three years on the TURA list of Toxic 
substances, the proportion released to the environment had decreased, possibly due to greater 
awareness and changes in the approach of industry. 
 
The Higher Hazard Substance designation in 2016, with its lower reporting threshold to 1000 lbs. 
per year, led to an increase in the number of facilities reporting use of 1-BP under TURA. In 2016, 
21 facilities reported use of the HHS 1-BP, up from just 2 facilities in 2015.  
 
Since its designation as an HHS, toxics use reduction efforts have helped to reduce the overall 
amount of 1-BP used in Massachusetts. As of 2022, there are 15 facilities using 1-BP in the State. 
Table 1 summarizes the 2022 TURA reporting data on 1-BP use by facility and sector. Metal 
coating and allied services, semiconductors and related devices and adhesives and sealants are the 
sectors responsible for the most use of 1-BP in MA as of 2022. The majority of use of 1-BP is 
reported to be generated as a “byproduct.” Under TURA, this means that the 1-BP is a non-product 
output from manufacturing processes, such as use in vapor degreasing and other industrial cleaning 
processes.  
 
The information available under TURA does not represent all uses of this chemical by 
Massachusetts businesses. There may be other 1-BP users who are not captured under the TURA 
reporting requirements due to lower quantities of use, a smaller number of full-time equivalent 
workers (FTEs), and/or the exclusion of certain industry sectors.  
 
2 Data on chemical use and release is in Massachusetts is publicly available on www.TURAdata.org.  To 
locate information about 1-BP, please visit www.TURAdata.org and on the “Chemical Search Tab” select n-
propyl bromide. 

Docket – EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
TURI O9icial Comments 1-BP 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
Figure 1: Chart showing trend in the Use and Release of 1-BP in MA from 2010 to 2022. The increase in 2016 is due to 
the listing of 1-BP as a HHS which lowered the reporting threshold. Source - TURAdata.org 
 
 
 
Table 1: Summary of 1-BP use and release as reported under for 2022. Includes facilities by sector and the diIerent 
ways in which 1-BP was used and released per TURA reporting categories. Source - TURAData.org 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Thousands (lbs)
Total Use and Release of 1-BP 
2010 - 2022
Sum of Total Use
Sum of Total Releases
2022 TURA Repor,ng Data for 1-BP  
Facility name 
Total Use 
Amount 
Generated as 
Byproduct 
Amount Shipped 
or as Product 
Total Releases 
Total Transfers 
 
Bolts, Nuts, Screws, Rivets, and Washers 
MICROGROUP INC 
THE 
2,493 
2,493 
0 
1,455 
1,038  
Adhesives and sealants 
HOLCIM SOLUTIONS 
AND PRODUCTS US 
LLC 
8,818 
0 
8,818 
0 
0  
Current-carrying wiring devices 
AMERICAN 
SUPERCONDUCTOR 
1,376 
1,376 
0 
1,376 
0  
Electronic components, n.e.c. 

Docket – EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
TURI O9icial Comments 1-BP 
 
 
 
 
5 
       
 
 
 
 
ULTRA ELECTRONICS 
HERLEY 
1,441 
1,441 
0 
248 
1,193  
Fabricated metal products, n.e.c. 
SENIOR METAL 
BELLOWS 
1,585 
1,585 
0 
0 
1,585  
Guided missiles and space vehicles 
LOCKHEED MARTIN 
CORP 
1,166 
1,166 
0 
1116 
0  
Industrial machinery, n.e.c. 
SYNVENTIVE 
MOLDING 
SOLUTIONS 
4,475 
4,75 
0 
4,475 
0  
Metal coating and allied services 
TECH ETCH INC 
4,112 
4,112 
0 
3,524 
587  
THE DUNCAN GROUP 
7,112 
7,795 
0 
7,506 
4  
Metal stampings, n.e.c. 
VALENTINE TOOL 
AND STAMPING CO 
2,039 
2,039 
0 
1,889 
150 
 
Plating and polishing 
CENTRAL METAL 
FINISHING INC 
3,472 
1,179 
0 
77 
1,102  
TECH ETCH INC 
2,937 
2,937 
0 
1,869 
1,068  
Screw machine products 
STAFFORD 
MANUFACTURING 
CORP 
4,959 
4,959 
0 
2,755 
2,204  
Semiconductors and related devices 
INTERNATIONAL 
RECTIFIER HIREL 
PRODUCTS 
6,315 
6,315 
0 
2,569 
3,745.6  
MICROSEMI 
LAWRENCE 
1,072 
1,072 
0 
215 
858  
Grand Total 
53,372 
42,944 
8,818 
29,073 
13,535  

Docket – EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
TURI O9icial Comments 1-BP 
 
 
 
 
6 
Conditions of Use and EPA’s Proposed Workplace 
Chemical Protection Program (WCPP) 
 
Based on 35 years of experience collaborating with businesses and workers to reduce the use of 1-
BP and other halogenated solvents, TURI recommends a careful review of the WCCP exemptions. 
The recommendation is based on the following: 
 
• The existence of safer alternatives that are technically and economically feasible for 
implementation by users of 1-BP, whose adoption could be incentivized through 
stronger regulation;  
• TURI’s observations of worker exposure to 1-BP despite PPE requirements; and 
• The release of 1-BP near environmental justice communities.  
Availability of Alternatives 
TURI has decades of experiences that may be of relevance in EPA’s efforts on 1-BP and other toxic 
solvents. Much of this is catalogued in CleanerSolutions, TURI’s publicly available database 
containing 25 years of information and testing results on safer alternatives to solvent cleaning3. 
The database may be useful for EPA and companies to better understand the extensive availability 
of safer alternatives to 1-BP for use with different contaminants, substrates and equipment.  A few 
specific examples of the availability of alternatives are provided below. 
Alternatives in Manufacturing 
TURI notes the inclusion of industrial vapor degreasing as a condition of use which is not banned 
and subject to a workplace chemical protection program. Toxics Use Reduction has proven 
successful in eliminating the upstream use of 1-BP in vapor degreasing, among other conditions 
of use.  
 
In one case TURI supported an electronics component facility to switch away from 1-BP in their 
vapor degreasing unit4. Through eliminating 1-BP from its vapor degreasing process, the company 
achieved significant cost benefits and a safer environment for workers and fence line communities.  
 
Another company in MA used 1-BP in a vapor degreaser at their facility to clean oils, lubricants, 
and greases from copper and steel parts. The TURI lab identified an alternative cleaning method 
for the company that not only decreases the potential human health hazard but also saves time and 
money. 1-BP was replaced with an alkaline aqueous cleaner in an ultrasonics tank for heat pipe 
cell cleaning to replace its vapor degreasing process. The implementation of this new aqueous 
 
3 TURI CleanerSolutions Database. https://www.cleanersolutions.org/ 
4 TURI Case Study on Elimination of 1-BP Use During Vapor Degreasing. 
https://www.turi.org/publications/cd-aero-case-study/ 

Docket – EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
TURI O9icial Comments 1-BP 
 
 
 
 
7 
cleaner and equipment significantly improved workplace health and safety, reduced environmental 
impact, eliminated the need to report under TURA and reduced operating costs5.  
Alternative Products 
TURI carried out an extensive review of different product categories for available products which 
do not contain any of the TSCA five priority chemicals, including 1-BP. Spot cleaners, electronics 
degreasers and auto parts degreasers, were identified without 1-BP or other chemicals of concern. 
Some of these products may be used under the COUs permitted in the rule. The availability and 
cost of these safer and effective alternatives may warrant a review of the permitted applications of 
1-BP under the current rule.  
 
Under the current rule, insulation consumer products would not be banned. However, during 
TURI’s review, a cold pipe insulation product without 1-BP, or any of the other chemicals of 
concern, was identified. The water-based product provided satisfactory performance, while 
presenting reduced hazard properties and a price point on the lower end of the spectrum. TURI 
recommends carefully reviewing the insulation exemption, as banning this use could help drive 
the development and adoption of similar products. TURI would be happy to provide additional 
information from this review of alternatives.  
Assumptions regarding PPE and Engineering Controls 
TURI has extensive experience collaborating with workers who use 1-BP and other halogenated 
solvents in the context of the conditions of use (COUs) covered under the WCPP. TURI’s 
experience supports the view that PPE is not a reliable source of protection for workers handling 
1-BP.  
 
In TURI’s experience, PPE use can be inconsistent and/or ineffective. TURA program staff have 
learned from businesses and workers about the difficulties posed by PPE; equipment can be 
difficult to use and can compromise work effectiveness, and according to the pollution prevention 
hierarchy is a last-resort option for protecting workers. TURA program staff have made these 
observations in their own work within Massachusetts, and have also observed similar issues when 
visiting a technical assistance program in another state.   
 
TURI program staff have observed 1-BP users often do not use gloves when handling the chemical. 
Workers also lack information on the correct choice of glove. According to OSHA, “1-BP easily 
travels through most glove materials. Recommended glove materials for protection against 1-BP 
are supported polyvinyl alcohol or multiple-layer laminates.” However, TURA program staff have 
reviewed safety data sheets (SDSs) for 1-BP and have found that many SDSs do not specify the 
type of gloves that workers should use. 
 
Similarly, when visiting facilities that use 1-BP or other halogenated solvents, TURA program staff 
have observed that workers generally do not use respirators. Some Massachusetts facilities use 
open top, manual vapor degreasers, which is one of the conditions of use that EPA has recognized 
 
5 TURI Report on Alternatives to Halogenated Solvents Used in Surface 
Cleaning . https://www.turi.org/publications/alternatives-to-halogenated-solvents-used-in-surface-
cleaning/ 

Docket – EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
TURI O9icial Comments 1-BP 
 
 
 
 
8 
as a source of unreasonable risk. Workers manually place baskets into these open-top vapor 
degreasers, and based on TURA program staff observations of these workers, they may receive 
substantial dermal and respiratory exposures when leaning over the degreaser and breaking the 
vapor barrier. Again, TURA program staff have noticed workers not using respirators when 
conducting this process. 
 
TURI notes the emphasis placed on closed loop processing and automated systems (e.g. vacuum 
degreasers) as a solution to comply with the proposed WCCPs. In its extensive work with 
companies, TURI has found that there is still significant risk of exposure for workers who use 
these engineering controls, especially when chemicals are added to and disposed from the system. 
On a visit with a partner agency to facilities in another state, TURA program staff observed workers 
carrying solvents in open buckets within the facility, creating risks of respiratory exposures, 
splashes and spills.     
Environmental Justice Considerations 
Under the current 1-BP rule, fugitive air emissions of 1-BP from industrial sites would continue. 
This is evidenced by TURA reporting in 2022 in which all 1-BP releases (~29,000 lbs) were 
reported as fugitive air emissions. These facilities would likely be permitted to continue using and 
releasing 1-BP under the WCCP COU listed in the draft risk management rule.  
TURI would emphasize that the draft rule does not protect certain fence line communities from 
potential exposure. In many cases, preventing these releases would help achieve environmental 
justice goals. TURI has analyzed the use of Toxics in Massachusetts, including 1-BP, in the context 
of environmental justice. The map in Figure 2 shows the facility which reported the highest 1-BP 
releases in 2022, in relation to environmental justice communities. The potential of this rule to 
advance environmental justice nationwide is the rationale for TURI to suggest a careful 
examination of the permitted COUs, especially those which may result in emissions of 1-BP to the 

Docket – EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
TURI O9icial Comments 1-BP 
 
 
 
 
9 
environment. TURI would be happy to provide information on other facilities in Massachusetts 
that release 1-BP in proximity to environmental justice communities.  
 
Figure 2: Map showing location of facility with highest releases of 1-BP in 2022 in relation to Environmental Justice 
Neighborhoods in MA. Source - TURAData.Org, Mass Department of Public Health Environmental Justice Tool

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0147 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
Page 1 of 3 
®TM Trademark of The Dow Chemical Company (“Dow”) or an affiliated company of Dow 
 
 
General Business 
 
 
September 23, 2024 
 
Submitted via regulations.gov 
 
Ms. Bethany Masten 
Existing Chemicals Risk Management Division 
Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics 
Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460–0001  
 
Re: 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Proposed Rule: 1-Bromopropane (1–BP); 
Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA); EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
 
Dear Ms. Masten: 
 
Dow appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on EPA’s proposed risk management 
rule for 1-BP. Although Dow does not manufacture nor use 1-BP, we welcome the opportunity to 
provide data that will help inform EPA’s prioritization, risk evaluation, and risk management. 
  
Laboratory Capabilities and Cost Estimates 
 
EPA has requested information on the availability of laboratory capacity needed to meet the 
proposed standard, and the costs associated with such testing. The following information is 
provided to help meet this request from EPA. 
 
First, to determine if a lab can meet the method sensitivity needs for a lowered exposure limit, a 
company needs to determine the limit of quantitation (LOQ or reporting limit) that the lab must 
meet. Standard industry practice for industrial hygiene (IH) sampling methods is to meet 10% of 
the exposure limit, not the exposure limit. For 1-BP, the Existing Chemical Exposure Limit 
(ECEL) is 0.05 ppm (0.25 mg/m3), and 10% of the ECEL would be 0.005 ppm (0.025 mg/m3). 
Following National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) 1025, this would be a 
detection limit of 0.3 ug/sample for an 8-hour sample duration (Note, NIOSH 1025 has a 
maximum 12 L sample volume used in the calculation below). Each lab used would have to be 
able to quantify 1-BP at 0.3 ug to meet 10% of the ECEL. 
 
Calculating LOQ: 
(ECEL)(10%) = [(Needed ug LOQ)(24.45)]/[Maximum Sample Volume in L)(Molecular 
Weight as g/mol)] 
(0.05 ppm ECEL)(0.1)=[(Needed ug LOQ)(24.45)]/[(12 L)(122.99 g/mol)] 
Needed ug LOQ= [(12 L)(122.99 g/mol) (0.05 ppm ECEL)(0.1)]/(24.45) 
Needed ug LOQ= 0.3 ug 
 
 
 

 
 
Page 2 of 3 
®TM Trademark of The Dow Chemical Company (“Dow”) or an affiliated company of Dow 
 
 
General Business 
 
Two labs commonly used for IH sample analysis were contacted regarding their ability to meet 
the 1-BP ECEL and the 0.3 ug reporting limit (10% of the ECEL). None of the labs could 
currently meet this low limit. Current analysis uses a Gas Chromatograph paired with a Flame 
Ionization Detector (GC/FID). One of the labs indicated it may be able to meet the lower limit by 
conducting a method extension study. The estimated cost for the method extension was $500. 
This does not include costs for actual sample analysis. However, a simple method extension 
using existing GC/FID technology is unlikely to work. To detect the low level of 0.3 ug, a more 
sensitive Mass Spectrometer (MS) detector or Electron Capture detector (ECD) would likely be 
needed. Estimates for a method extension using GC/MS or GC/ECD technology ranged from 
$2,500 to $5,000.  This does not include cost for actual sample analysis.   
 
It is important to note that each lab that will analyze IH samples needs to conduct its own study 
to determine if it can meet the lower detection limit. That means the method extension cost of 1-
BP for each lab could range from $2,500 to $5,000. Each company would have to pay this cost 
for the lab it uses. For example, if 10 different IH labs were to analyze 1-BP samples, the total 
cost would be about $25,000 to $50,000. We are sharing this information because we believe it 
is important for EPA to understand that when an exposure limit is lowered, companies need to 
be able to detect 10% of the limit, and each lab used for analysis must modify its methods to 
detect at the new lower limit. It is an individual cost that each company must pay.  
 
It is also important to note that not all labs will be able to meet the new lower exposure limit. To 
determine lab capacity and capability, a company needs to contact each lab used for sample 
analysis to understand if it has the ability to meet the lower limit. It would benefit industry’s data 
collection efforts if EPA could contact some commonly used IH labs during the ECEL setting 
process to understand if the proposed ECEL limit is technically feasible and get a cost estimate 
on this change impact. To do this, EPA should consider working with the Wisconsin 
Occupational Health Lab (WOHL) Lab that analyzes IH samples collected for OSHA’s voluntary 
consultation program. 
  
Setting of a De Minimis Level 
 
Dow urges EPA to set a de minimis level for 1-BP to allow for low level impurities that do not 
contribute to unreasonable risk. Setting a de minimis not only helps EPA focus its risk 
management process on the uses and levels that pose risk, but it also helps industry. When 
there is a de minimis level, industry is able to test whether a product or entity would be 
regulated, and it targets resources in the areas where they are most needed. It is important to 
note that without a de minimis, analytical testing and quantification are impractical, as one 
cannot measure to zero with any analytical technique. 
 
In general, more clarity on how EPA sets de minimis levels is needed so this approach can be 
leveraged to other chemicals. This would be very valuable to both EPA and industry because it 
would help focus resources as EPA moves forward in its evaluation of prioritized chemicals. 
Dow would appreciate the opportunity to work with EPA to develop a framework for setting a de 
minimis for risk management chemicals.  
 
 

 
 
Page 3 of 3 
®TM Trademark of The Dow Chemical Company (“Dow”) or an affiliated company of Dow 
 
 
General Business 
 
Thank you again for the opportunity to provide these comments. If you have any questions or 
would like to discuss further, please contact me by phone at 989.496.8393 or by email at 
m.lafore@dow.com. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
Mike LaFore  
Americas Product Regulatory Services Senior Leader

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0149 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
AFL-CIO Comments on EPA’s Proposed Rule on 1-Bromopropane (1-BP) Regulation 
Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) 
EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
 
The AFL-CIO welcomes this opportunity to comment on EPA’s proposed risk 
management rule for 1-Bromopropane (1-BP). The AFL-CIO is the federation of 60 national and 
international labor unions representing 12.5 million working people across a wide variety of 
industries. Our unions represent workers in a broad range of industries and processes where they 
are exposed to 1-BP, including manufacturing, aircraft maintenance, disposal, cleaning, and an 
array of other industrial and federal government settings in which they regularly use and are 
exposed to products that contain 1-BP. The AFL-CIO and its affiliated unions therefore have a 
vital interest in the elimination of the unreasonable risks posed by workplace exposures to 1-BP 
and urge EPA to quickly finalize this important risk management rule. 
 
In most respects, we fully support EPA’s proposed rule. It is well-established that 
occupational exposure to 1-BP contributes to significantly increased risks of cancer and 
neurological disorders. We therefore fully support EPA’s determination that industrial uses of 1-
BP must be quickly eliminated in those conditions of use where safer alternatives are available 
and where EPA cannot be assured that implementation of workplace control measures can 
eliminate those risks. We fully support EPA’s proposal to condition the continued use of1-BP for 
certain conditions on compliance with an existing chemical exposure limit (ECEL) of 0.05 parts 
per million (ppm) as an 8-hour time-weighted average and implementation of worker chemical 
protection plans (WCPPs) that include control measures using the hierarchy of controls, 
exposure monitoring, worker training, recordkeeping and other necessary protections. We also 
applaud EPA in devising self-certification requirements as an additional check to ensure 
owner/operators seeking to use 1-BP will only be able to obtain the toxic substance if they certify 

2 
 
to the distributors, under penalty of perjury, that they are complying with the ECEL and worker 
chemical protection plans (WCPP). However, we would not support a self-certification as a 
replacement for the WCPP measures. 
 
As discussed below, we have three areas of concern, which we believe EPA must address 
before finalizing this rule: First, the proposal must provide workers and their representatives with 
the right to be actively involved in developing the workplace chemical protection plan and in 
observing workplace exposure monitoring, and to have ready access to monitoring records and 
self-certification records. Second, the prescriptive controls for dermal protection must be revised 
to require owner/operators to consider alternative control measures, consistent with the hierarchy 
of controls, before providing workers with appropriately selected/assigned protective gloves, and 
to self-certify in order to obtain 1-BP for their conditions of use. Third, EPA should adopt the 
primary regulatory alternative for vapor cleaning and degreasing, permitting these operations to 
be conducted only in closed-loop systems.  
I. 
Involving Workers and their Representatives in Developing, Implementing, and 
Monitoring the Worker Protection Plan 
 
a. Access to Records 
The proposed rule’s recordkeeping provision requires owners/operators to “document the 
notice to and ability of any potentially exposed person that may reasonably be affected by [1-BP] 
inhalation exposure to readily access the exposure control plans, facility exposure monitoring 
records, PPE program implementation or any other information relevant to [1-BP] in the 
workplace.” § 751.815(b)(3). Similarly, proposed section 751.807(c)(2)(iii) requires 
owners/operators to make “the exposure control plan and associated records available to 
potentially exposed persons.” These provisions must be expanded to explicitly require 
owners/operators to provide access to all of these records to the workers’ designated 

3 
 
representatives, and EPA should define “designated representative” to include unions and, for 
unrepresented workers, other representatives they designate to obtain these records on their 
behalf.  
Unions, as the recognized or certified collective bargaining agent, have the right under 
the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) to obtain information about workplace exposures. 
They often have the expertise to analyze exposure information, are positioned to assist the 
workers they represent in understanding and utilizing the information available to them about 
workplace conditions, conduct training, and routinely bargain for improved working conditions. 
They therefore have an important role to play in ensuring the rule effectively protects potentially 
exposed workers.  
Where those workers are not represented, however, it is equally important that they have 
the opportunity to designate organizations or individuals to gain access to this information. Too 
often, hourly workers may not have the expertise to evaluate these exposure and compliance 
documents, and designated experts can assist them in understanding these issues.  Broadly 
defining “designated representative” would be consistent with the approach taken by both the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Mine Safety and Health 
Administration (MSHA).  
For example, OSHA’s “Access to Employee Medical and Access Records,”1 entitles 
workers and their “designated representatives” to medical and workplace exposure records. The 
rule defines “designated representative” as “any individual or organization to whom an employee 
gives written authorization to exercise a right of access.” The definition continues that, “for the 
purposes of access to employee exposure records and analyses using exposure or medical 
 
1 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1020. 

4 
 
records, a recognized or certified collective bargaining agent shall be treated automatically as a 
designated representative without regard to written employee authorization.” 2 OSHA has also 
recently codified a long-standing practice of not only allowing unions to participate in workplace 
inspections, but to also permit workers to designate any outside party to serve as their 
representative during inspections.3 MSHA similarly allows miners—whether or not represented 
by a union—to designate a representative of their choosing.4  
EPA should accordingly require owner/operators to grant worker representatives—either 
unions or, for unrepresented workers, other representatives they designate—access to the 
information owner/operators must record and maintain under both §§ 751.807(c)(2)(iii) and 
751.815(b)(3). Moreover, EPA should require owner/operators to make these records available to 
potentially exposed persons and their designated representatives promptly when requested, and 
the rule should make clear that relevant information cannot be redacted. 
b. Development of the Exposure Control Plan 
The proposed rule requires owners/operators continuing to use 1-BP to develop and 
implement detailed exposure control plans and, as discussed, to “make the [plan] and associated 
records available to potentially exposed persons.” § 751,807(c)(2)(i) and (iii). Owner/operators 
must not only be required to make these plans available to “potentially exposed persons;” they 
must be required to involve those workers and their designated representatives in the 
development of the plans. These workers and their representatives are critically important 
participants in devising any control strategies. They work directly with the products and know 
 
2 Id. § 1910.1020(c)(3). 
3 29 C.F.R. § 1903.8(c). 
4 The Mine Safety Act permits “a representative authorized by . . . miners” to participate in mine inspections. 30 
U.S.C. § 813(f). MSHA regards “[a] miners’ representative [as] any person, group or organization designated by two 
or more miners to represent their interests during health and safety enforcement processes at their mine.” MSHA, 
“Miners’ Representative Guide,” available at https://arlweb.msha.gov/minersrepguide/minersrepguide.asp; see also 
30 C.F.R. § 40.1(b). 

5 
 
the practicalities and vulnerabilities of various control strategies and other related work 
processes—especially under non-ideal conditions—and often are able to identify the most 
effective and practical methods to remedy them.  
 As discussed in the last section, where the workers in a particular workplace are 
organized, their “designated representative” is their union and where they are not organized, 
workers should either be permitted to designate a representative or the owner/operator can 
consult with the workers themselves. Without running afoul of the restrictions NLRA section 
8(a)(2) places on “employer dominated labor organizations,”5 owner/operators can meet with 
workers, poll them, or otherwise solicit their input on how best to devise a control plan. 
c. Exposure Monitoring 
While the proposed rule requires owner/operators to provide “potentially exposed 
persons” with the opportunity to observe exposure monitoring (§ 751.807(b)(2)(v)), EPA has 
again neglected the important role unions and other designated representatives play in this 
regard. OSHA standards routinely require employers to provide both workers and their 
designated representatives with the opportunity to observe monitoring, as an important check to 
ensure the monitoring is being conducted correctly and in a manner that is representative of 
employee exposure.6 
II. 
Prescriptive Controls 
EPA has proposed that for certain COUs where the Agency has determined that 
inhalation exposures do not pose an unreasonable risk of harm, but that dermal exposures do, 
owner/operators will simply be required to deploy a PPE program of providing and maintaining 
 
5 29 U.S.C. § 158(a)(3). See Electromation, 309 N.L.R.B. 990 (1992), enf’d, 35 F.2d 1148 (7th Cir. 1994); E.I du 
Pont, 311 N.L.R.B. 893 (1993). 
6 See, e.g., OSHA Methylene Chloride Standard, 29 C.F.R. § 1910.1052(d)(6). 

6 
 
protective gloves.7  While it may not be necessary, in those circumstances, to require 
owner/operators to conduct the airborne exposure monitoring required for COUs covered by the 
proposed WCPP, it remains important that owner/operators employ the hierarchy of controls to 
determine whether other control strategies could obviate the need to resort to or supplement with 
PPE. As EPA recognized in proposing to require owner/operators using NMP to implement the 
hierarchy of controls to reduce dermal contact with that toxic substance, addressing workplace 
exposures through the hierarchy of controls is considered best practice by the industrial hygiene 
community.8 Under this strategy, which prioritizes “exposure control strategies from most 
preferred to least preferred techniques,” PPE, like protective gloves, may be used only after the 
owner/operator determines that it cannot adequately control exposures by eliminating the hazard, 
substituting a less hazardous substance, or implementing engineering or administrative controls, 
in that order.9 In their plan, owners/operators must be required to justify their approach.  
We urge EPA to adopt a similar approach to dermal exposures to 1-BP.  For example, if 
an engineering control is to close the process and eliminate the possibility of skin contact for 
production workers, there may be no need to require gloves for these workers. Or there may be 
other controls that reduce but do not eliminate dermal exposure. If unreasonable risk remains 
after moving through the hierarchy of controls, dermal personal protective equipment (PPE) 
should be required. In developing an exposure control plan, owner/operators must include 
provisions for providing appropriate dermal PPE for maintenance workers who have to open 
 
7 89 Fed.Reg. at 65098-99; § 751.809. 
8 American Industrial Hygiene Association. “Hierarchy of Controls: White Paper.” AIHA-
assets.sfo2.digitaloceanspaces.com/AIHA/resources/White-Papers/HOC-White-Paper.pdf. V. 1. May 17, 2024.  
9 EPA, Proposed Rule, “n-Methylpyrrolidone (NMP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act 
(TSCA),” 89 Fed.Reg. 51124, 51142 (June 14, 2024). 

7 
 
closed systems to work on them and emergency responders, in addition to any controls farther up 
the hierarchy. 
III. 
Vapor Degreasing 
For open-top and in-line batch vapor cleaning and degreasing, the AFL-CIO supports the 
primary regulatory alternative that would require facilities to use only closed-loop vapor 
degreasers for any batch vapor cleaning and degreasing; to use ventilation systems and 
engineering controls that achieve exposure concentrations of less than 0.5 ppm as an 8-hour 
time- weighted average; to isolate the vapor degreaser in a ‘‘regulated area’’ with controlled 
access to minimize exposures to 1–BP; and to require the use of respirators with APF of 10 for 
any worker in the regulated area of the vapor degreaser and the use of gloves made of supported 
polyvinyl alcohol or a multiple-layer laminated material. EPA has already identified a study 
showing air emissions can be reduced by 98% or more when a closed-loop degreaser is used 
instead of an open-top vapor degreaser.10 This engineering control is a common and effective 
approach to isolate the worker from this chemical exposure. Because EPA is required to set 
limits based on health, and the industry has an effective control measure readily available, the 
Agency should adopt this regulatory alternative. 
 
10 89 Fed.Reg. at 65093-94.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0153 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
Environmental Defense Fund 
 
Comments on 1-Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control 
Act (TSCA); Proposed Rule 
 
Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471; 89 Fed. Reg. 65066. August 8, 2024 
 
 
Submitted: September 23, 2024 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Environmental Defense Fund (EDF) appreciates the opportunity to provide comments to the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) on 1-Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the 
Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA); Proposed Rule.1 
 
1. EPA should revise its flawed approach to estimating the unreasonable risks to frontline 
communities. 
EPA has calculated risks to fenceline communities from 1-bromopropane that are clearly 
unreasonable risks but discounts these unreasonable risks by misrepresenting the significance of 
its own estimates and the cancer benchmark used.  Further, the Agency fails to fully consider the 
risks faced by potentially exposed or susceptible subpopulations as required by TSCA. EPA has 
underestimated the actual exposures of 1-bromopropane to fenceline communities and does not 
fully consider risks for developmental toxicity.   
 
A. EPA misrepresents the cancer benchmarks in an attempt to trivialize the cancer 
risks estimated for potentially exposed or susceptible subpopulations.  
EPA’s characterization of the Clean Air Act benchmark is misleading at best.  EPA description is 
not consistent with its use of cancer benchmarks under the Clean Air Act. The Agency 
selectively mentions only one end of the cancer benchmark range considered in determining 
whether a risk is an acceptable risk under section 112(f).  The Agency considers a cancer risk of 
less than one in one million generally acceptable and a risk of greater than 1 in 10,000 generally 
unacceptable.  For risks within those bookends, EPA will make take in account several factors in 
 
1 1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA); Proposed Rule, 
89 Fed. Reg. 65,066, Aug. 8, 2024. (Proposed Rule). 
 

 
2 
 
determining whether a risk is unacceptable, including among others the distribution of risk 
within the population and the presence of sensitive subpopulations at various risk levels.2   
 
The following is taken from Exhibit 21 Summary Of Assumptions And Criteria For Evaluating 
Public Health Risks of EPA’s Residual Risk Report to Congress3  
 
 
Screening Level1 
Refined2 
Criteria • Upper-end individual cancer risk 
<10-6 generally considered 
acceptable 
• Upper-end individual cancer risk 
> 10-6 may lead to refined analysis 
• HI < 1 generally considered 
acceptable 
• HI > 1 leads to reexamination of 
additivity assumptions and if HI 
still greater than 1, may lead to 
refined analysis 
• Upper-end individual cancer risk <10-6 
generally considered acceptable 
• Upper-end individual cancer risk of 
roughly 1 in 10,000 is ordinarily 
considered the upper end of the range of 
acceptability 
• Decisions on unacceptable risk will be 
made on a case specific basis, 
considering information including 
confidence in the risk estimate, 
population size, distribution of risk 
within the population, presence of 
sensitive subpopulations at various risk 
levels, the effects of concern, 
uncertainties in the effects information, 
and other factors. 
1 Screening assessment may be based on upper-end estimated HAP exposure at the location of either the 
hypothetical MEI or the MIR in locations people are believed to occupy. Available toxicity values will be 
considered. 
2 Refined assessment based on more detailed and site-specific, and less conservative, estimated HAP 
exposures at the MIR location and throughout the spatial area of impact. EPA consensus toxicity values, or 
equivalent, reviewed in light of any additional credible and relevant information, are typically used. 
 
Referring to 1 in 10,000 as a presumptive benchmark4 while discussing multiple risks greater 
than 1 in 1,000,000 appears to be an attempt to trivialize the risks to fenceline communities and 
to falsely convey that EPA is being conservative in its estimation of risks. Nothing can be further 
from the truth.  As discussed below, EPA’s estimation of exposure and risks are not conservative 
(i.e., does not overestimate risks). 
 
 
2 EPA OAQPS, Residual Risk Report To Congress EPA-453/R-99-001 (March 1999). 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2013-08/documents/risk_rep.pdf 
 
3 Ibid 
 
4 Proposed Rule at 65101. 

 
3 
 
Further, under TSCA it is a requirement not only a policy that EPA specifically consider the 
risks to potentially exposed or susceptible subpopulations. When assessing risks to fenceline 
communities who are often exposed to multiple chemicals, many of which cause cancer and 
often the same types of cancer, EPA’s TSCA program would be advised to consider how other 
EPA programs such as Superfund address risks to communities that are exposed to multiple 
carcinogens. “EPA believes that setting a 10-6 risk level for individual chemicals and pathways 
will generally lead to cumulative risks within the risk range (10-4 to 10-6) for the combinations of 
chemicals typically found at Superfund sites.”5   
  
EPA notes that the cancer benchmarks are not a bright line. While the cancer benchmarks may 
not be a bright line, this does not justify a dismissal of risks or allowing greater risks for 
fenceline communities under TSCA. Further, the TSCA requirement that EPA specifically 
consider the risks to potentially exposed or susceptible subpopulations and the recognition by 
other Agency programs that cancer benchmarks that allow a smaller degree of risk (generally a 
benchmark of 1 in 1,000,000) are more appropriate for sensitive or more highly exposed 
subpopulations would call for considering risks greater than 1 in 1,000,000 unreasonable risks. 
 
B. EPA should determine that the clear risks to fenceline communities it has identified 
are unreasonable risks. 
Despite calculating multiple risks using a methodology that systematically underestimates the 
risks from 1-bromopropane, the Agency does not identify unreasonable risks to fenceline 
communities.  Rather the Agency stunningly states that “EPA’s fenceline analysis for the air 
pathway for 1–bromopropane indicates that EPA is not able to conclude that there are no 
potential risks to fenceline communities.”6   This statement clearly conflicts with EPA’s own 
analysis.  EPA goes further and states that it “is not making a determination of unreasonable risk 
based on the fenceline screening analysis.”7  Clearly there are unreasonable risks and EPA does 
not have the discretion to pretend they do not exist. 
 
EPA identified risks greater than 1 in 1,000,000 for cancer resulting from releases from 105 
facilities at 100 meters and for 47 facilities at greater than 100 meters. These are risks from each 
of these facilities EPA considered them in isolation. EPA did not aggregate multiple exposure 
sources or settings within a given condition of use, such as combined exposures from multiple 
facilities. If EPA had done this even within conditions of use, both the number of facilities that 
contribute to risks greater than 1 in 1,000,000 for cancer would likely be larger as would the 
magnitude of the risks.  Further, considering the exposures to fenceline communities from 
multiple facilities may have resulted in greater risks for developmental toxicity. 
 
5 EPA. Soil Screening Guidance. https://semspub.epa.gov/work/HQ/175231.pdf. 
 
6 Proposed Rule at 65101. 
 
7 Proposed Rule at 65101. 

 
4 
 
As EDF has commented elsewhere on EPA’s Fenceline Approach used for estimating the 
exposures and risks of 1-bromopropane,8 EPA falsely equates the use of some conservative 
assumptions in its exposure and risks assessment with conservative assessments. By outright 
excluding exposures, considering exposures in isolation, and excluding peak or otherwise 
elevated exposures, EPA has developed a Fenceline Approach that systematically underestimates 
exposures and thus risks.9  
 
EPA did not aggregate exposure and risk across conditions of use. Real-world scenarios in which 
fenceline community residents may be subject to combined risks from two or more conditions of 
use are not considered. For example, EPA’s approach fails to account for the aggregate chemical 
exposure and risk faced by a person who lives both near an industrial facility and next door to a 
dry cleaner emitting a given chemical.  
 
Further, the fenceline approach does not rely on sufficiently robust data. For example, the use 
only of annual TRI release data will obfuscate release peaks, such as accidental releases, and 
facility start up and shut down events. These peak releases are particularly important for 
considering risks for developmental toxicity.  
 
EPA also tries to undermine the validity of the risks it estimated by stating that there “are some 
uncertainties associated with the fenceline analysis for the air pathway for 1–BP.”10  Yet, the 
uncertainties in the fenceline approach serve to underestimate the exposures as the SACC has 
noted, not overestimate them.11  
 
C. EPA should reconsider risks for developmental toxicity. 
Developmental toxicity is the most sensitive endpoint, yet EPA states that protecting for cancer 
will be protective for all endpoints. However, EPA clearly does not appropriately consider the 
scenarios that are appropriate for developmental toxicity. 
 
 
 
8 EPA. Draft TSCA Screening Level Approach for Assessing Ambient Air and Water Exposures to 
Fenceline Communities Version 1.0 at 62 (Jan. 2022), https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-
01/draft-fenceline-report_sacc.pdf (“Fenceline Approach”). 
 
9 Comments of Environmental Defense Fund on Draft Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) Screening 
Level Approach for Assessing Ambient Air and Water Exposures to Fenceline Communities 
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2021-0415-0085. 
 
10 Proposed Rule at 65102. 
 
11 Science Advisory Committee on Chemicals Meeting Minutes and Final Report No. 2022-01, 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2021-0415-0095 
 

 
5 
 
EPA underestimates exposures in what it terms the most conservative exposure scenario: “The 
fenceline analysis also evaluated the most ‘‘conservative exposure scenario’’ that consists of a 
facility that operates year-round (365 days per year, 24 hours per day, 7 days per week) in in a 
South Coastal meteorologic region and a rural topography setting.”12  
 
In the Fenceline Approach, EPA simply divided the annual TRI releases by the number of 
operating days to estimate a daily release.  
“The release scenarios consider two potential facility operating conditions. The first 
represents a facility that operates year-round (365 days per year), 24/7. The second 
represents a facility that operates generally on a Monday through Friday schedule (260 
days per year) for 8 hours per day, 5 days per week. The difference between the two 
release scenarios is the resulting total daily release, frequency of release, and duration of 
release. These conditions result in a different exposure pattern that is captured by 
modeling both release scenarios. As an example, if a facility has a total annual release of 
10,000 473 lb/year, then the daily release from a facility operating 365 days/year, 7 days 
per week, and 24 hours per day would be 27.4 lb per day for every day of the year over a 
24-hour period. If the facility operates 260 days per year, 5 days per week, for 8 hours per 
day, the daily release would be 38.5 lb per day, but only Monday through Friday and over 
an 8-hour period.”13  
 
This is not the most conservative estimate for developmental toxicity which is the most sensitive 
endpoint.  The more conservative estimate would be to consider the developmental toxicity 
window and to assume there are a fewer number of operating days.  EPA’s second scenario 
which assumes 260 days per year for 8 hours per day would be a more conservative assumption 
because it would result in a higher daily release number that would apply for the short-term 
exposure window.   
 
* * * 
The many ways in which the Fenceline Approach excludes or underestimates exposure 
demonstrate that the best available science, required by TSCA Section 26(h), is not being used to 
estimate risks to fenceline communities and other susceptible subpopulations.   
 
In addition to not using the best available science, EPA trivializes and ignores the serious risks 
faced by fenceline communities and pregnant women, both potentially exposed or susceptible 
subpopulations that require specific considerations under TSCA. 
 
12 Proposed Rule at 65102. 
 
13 Draft TSCA Screening Level Approach for Assessing Ambient Air and Water Exposures to Fenceline 
Communities Version 1.0 at 62 (Jan. 2022), https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-01/draft-
fenceline-report_sacc.pdf (“Fenceline Approach”). 
 

 
6 
 
 
2. EPA should not dismiss unreasonable risks to fenceline communities by pointing to 
non-existent regulations and phantom benefits of the WCPP. 
In its discussion of risks to fenceline communities, EPA handwaves at non-existent regulations 
as a future means to address current exposures and risks.  As one example, EPA points to 
anticipated National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP) under the 
Clean Air Act.  
“As NESHAPs continue to be reviewed, and as the majority of facilities assessed, and 
those which indicate potential risk, in the fenceline analysis were vapor degreasing 
facilities, the NESHAPs process under the CAA will assess risk to the general population 
at the fenceline and regulate as necessary.”14   
 
There are, of course, multiple problems with this. First, there is no regulation in place.  EPA 
cannot determine how a non-existent regulation will address the risks faced by communities.  
Second, even if EPA were in the process of developing a proposed NESHAP and thus has a 
sense of what a draft proposed rule would look like, this is not necessarily equivalent to the final 
regulation. A draft proposed rule would likely be subject to Executive Order 12866 review and 
likely would be modified during that review before proposal.  The proposed rule would be 
subject to public comment, would be subsequently revised, and would also likely be subject to 
another Executive Order 12866 review and modification before finalization. Third, even if the 
NESHAP were to mitigate the risks so that they were no longer unreasonable, in the interim the 
fenceline communities would continue to be subject to the risks for an undetermined length of 
time.  This open-ended delay and uncertain action is for a chemical that, among other harms, 
causes cancer and developmental toxicity. 
 
EPA also points to its proposed WCPP requirements as something that “may reduce exposures to 
the general population for facilities identified in the fenceline analysis.”  (Apparently this refers 
to fenceline communities and the general population beyond.)  Yet, EPA does not explain how or 
to what degree it estimates that the WCPP will reduce exposure to the general population.  It is 
clear that EPA does not know how much of a reduction will result because elsewhere in the 
preamble the Agency requests comment on “on best practices to remove and reduce fugitive 
emissions of 1–BP from relevant operations including, but not limited to, chemical 
manufacturing, vapor degreasing, electronics degreasing, cold cleaning, and adhesives 
manufacturing.”  
 
Elsewhere in the preamble, EPA states that it “recognizes that owners and operators may have 
difficulty distinguishing between emission increases due to implementation of the WCPP and 
emissions increases resulting from other factors such as increased manufacturing, processing, or 
 
14 Proposed Rule at 65102. 
 

 
7 
 
use of 1– BP.”15 This clearly contradicts and undermines the Agency’s assertion that the WCPP 
requirements “may reduce exposures” to those living near these facilities.  
 
Thus, there is no factual basis for EPA to dismiss the unreasonable risks to fenceline 
communities based on the CAA NESHAP or the WCPP. 
 
3. EPA is required to address the unreasonable risks it has identified not develop a 
mechanism for notifying communities that their risks are increasing. 
 
EPA must use section 6(a) to mitigate the clearly unreasonable risks it has identified. Yet rather 
than address these unreasonable risks, EPA requests comment “on methods to inform fenceline 
communities of any increases of 1–BP emissions to ambient air.”16 
 
It is not clear what EPA expects the fenceline communities to do both now when they are 
experiencing unreasonable risks, and in the future when the releases and the magnitude of the 
risks they face increase.  Does EPA expect them to move?  Congress tasked EPA - not the 
communities - with addressing unreasonable risks presented by the manufacturing, processing, 
distribution in commerce, use and disposal.  EPA must address these unreasonable risks, not 
push the Agency’s responsibility onto fenceline communities.  
 
 
* 
 * 
 *  
 * 
 *  
 
  
EDF appreciates EPA’s consideration of these comments. 
 
15 Proposed Rule at 65103.  
 
16 Proposed Rule at 65103.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0136 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
1 of 6 
The life science business of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany operates as MilliporeSigma in the U.S. and Canada. 
MilliporeSigma 
Sigma-Aldrich Corporation  
A subsidiary of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany  
3050 Spruce Street  
St. Louis, MO 63103  
USA Phone +1 (800) 521-8956 
 
 
September 20, 2024 
  
  
Submitted via http://www.regulations.gov; Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
  
  
Document Control Office  
Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics (OPPT)  
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW 
Washington, DC 20460-0001  
  
  
Re: 1-Bromopropane (1-BP) Proposed Rulemaking Under Section 6(a) of the Toxic 
Substances Control Act (TSCA); Proposed Rule (RIN 2070-AK73) 
  
Dear OPPT,  
  
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on the “1-Bromopropane (1-BP) Proposed 
Rulemaking Under Section 6(a) of the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)” (herein 
after referred to as the “1-BP proposed rule”). MilliporeSigma is a leading supplier to the 
global Life Science Industry, providing solutions and services for research, development, and 
production of biotechnology and pharmaceutical drug therapies.  
  
MilliporeSigma supports the protection of consumers and workers from chemical risk and 
values the implementation of science-based exposure limits, such as the Workplace Chemical 
Protection Program (WCPP). We also believe that compliance and intended risk mitigation 
goals (as outlined in the 1-BP proposed rule) are best achieved with clear, logical, and well-
defined regulations. 
 
 
1) 
1-BP Use at MilliporeSigma  
  
MilliporeSigma’s use of 1-BP is critical to the research and innovation. EPA’s proposal permits 
MilliporeSigma’s continued uses of 1-BP as follows:   
  
• 
Industrial and commercial use in laboratory chemicals:  
o 
1-BP is used for manufacture of products used in laboratory settings, including 
research and development applications such as chemical synthesis, analytical 
standards, and antibodies.  
 
 
 

 
2 of 6 
The life science business of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany operates as MilliporeSigma in the U.S. and Canada. 
 
 
2) 
Establish De Minimis Concentration  
 
It is critical that the EPA establish a de minimis allowance for the presence of 1-BP. As EPA is 
aware, it is impossible to demonstrate experimentally the total absence of a substance. An 
entity can only measure the absence down to an experimental level of detection.  
 
As stated in the previous N-Methylpyrrolidone Proposed Rulemaking Under Section 6(a) of 
TSCA1, the EPA emphasized the significance of the OSHA Hazard Communication Standard 
(29 CFR 1910.1200), which sets a de minimis level of 0.1% for carcinogenic chemicals and 
1% for non-carcinogenic ones. Moreover, EPA asserted as a matter of risk management 
policy, the Agency believes that the widespread awareness by industrial and commercial 
workplaces of the de minimis levels in the OSHA Hazard Communication Standard would 
generally support successful implementation of the levels EPA identifies. 
 
On the international level, 1-BP is identified as a substance of very high concern by the 
European Chemicals Agency and that Article 33(1) of the REACH Regulation details that 
businesses are only required to disclose when their products contain substances of very high 
concern that exceed 0.1%. While 1-BP is suspected to be carcinogenic, this indicates a need 
for a de minimis level for 1-BP that would be 0.1% under the OSHA Hazard Communication 
Standard. 
 
Furthermore, if 1-BP is present in a mixture above 0.1%, its presence would be noted on a 
Safety Data Sheet and an importer, processor, or user would know that it would have to 
evaluate its workplace against the WCPP.  
 
MilliporeSigma strongly encourages the EPA to adopt 0.1% as the de minimis level for 1-BP 
and to maintain consistency in the establishment of de minimis levels for proposed 
rulemaking under Section 6(a) of TSCA, aligning with both national and international 
regulations.  
 
 
3) 
Self-Certification  
 
Under the EPA’s 1-BP proposed rule, MilliporeSigma would be defined as a distributor and 
would have additional responsibilities under the proposed rule as outlined below:  
 
“To ensure distributors are only selling 1-BP to owners or operators of facilities able to 
implement and comply with the workplace requirements of the WCPP, EPA is proposing 
to require owners or operators who self-certify to provide a copy of the facility's 
current self-certification statement to the distributor from whom 1-BP is being 
purchased, for every purchase of 1-BP. EPA is also proposing for the distributors to 
collect, maintain, and retain a copy of the self-certification statement. EPA is also 
proposing to require distributors to keep records, such as invoices, that indicate the 
name of the purchaser and facility, date of sale, and quantity of 1-BP purchased. 
Distributors of 1-BP for the uses described in this unit may only distribute to those 
 
1 EPA-OPPT-0744-0015 

 
3 of 6 
The life science business of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany operates as MilliporeSigma in the U.S. and Canada. 
 
 
facilities that provide the correct self-certification statement for purchasing. EPA 
realizes that some facilities may not engage in the 1-BP uses listed in this unit at the 
time this proposed rule is finalized. Owners or operators that may wish to purchase 1-
BP after the publication of the final rule would still be required to submit the self-
certification statement to the distributor from whom 1-BP was initially purchased in 
order to purchase 1-BP, certifying that the facility for which 1-BP is being purchased 
will implement and comply with the WCPP. EPA is also proposing that distributors 
review the self-certification statement to ensure it is appropriately completed to 
include the owner or operator's and the facility's information, as outlined in this unit. 
As proposed, distributors would have to have a completed and valid self-certification 
statement for each sale of 1-bromopropane for the uses subject to the self-certification 
requirements. EPA is proposing that the distributors and owners or operators maintain 
and retain the self-certification statement and related invoices in the most 
administratively convenient form (electronic or paper) and retain the statement and 
supporting documentation for five years....“ 
  
The self-certification obligation will require MilliporeSigma, as a distributor, to invest 
additional time, effort, and resources in collecting, maintaining, and retaining copies of the 
self-certification statement for applicable customers. This will add complexity to each 
transaction for the affected product and condition of use, placing significant burden overall for 
administrative systems for both laboratories purchasing 1-BP and MilliporeSigma. 
 
MilliporeSigma is concerned that the unique self-certification approach proposed in the 1-BP 
regulatory action has not been used in prior rulemaking under section 6(a) of TSCA for 
chemicals with similar hazards. We urge the EPA to ensure consistency in rulemaking for risk 
management requirements and reconsider this approach, taking into consideration the 
burden placed on the industry from the 1-BP proposed rule. 
 
 
4) 
Monitoring Timeframe   
 
The 1-BP proposed rule states that, “EPA is proposing to require each owner or operator to 
establish an initial baseline monitoring sample to determine the magnitude of exposure for all 
persons who may be exposed to 1-BP within 33 months for Federal agencies and Federal 
contractors acting for or on behalf of the Federal Government and within 6 months after the 
date of publication of the final rule in the Federal Register for non-Federal owners and 
operators...”  
 
EPA should adopt consistency among the proposed rulemaking under Section 6(a) of TSCA. 
As with the Methylene Chloride; Regulation Under TSCA2, the proposed 180-day compliance 
timeframe was extended as it would not provide a sufficient amount of time to identify similar 
exposure groups and facilitate effective initial exposure monitoring, and as a result, this 
raised concern regarding the successful implementation of the WCPP for regulated entities.  
In consideration of the challenges of initiating the WCPP, even for facilities with industrial 
 
2 Federal Register: Methylene Chloride; Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act 
(TSCA) 

 
4 of 6 
The life science business of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany operates as MilliporeSigma in the U.S. and Canada. 
 
 
hygiene programs in place, and given the difference in the occupational exposure limits 
between the OSHA PEL and the EPA ECEL that may spur an increase in the need for 
monitoring or other exposure control assessment infrastructure, EPA determined that a longer 
compliance deadline of 12 months, as provided in the primary alternative regulatory action 
described in the proposal, would be an appropriate timeframe to conduct initial monitoring, 
which likely would require regulated entities to contract new services or realign current 
industrial hygiene professionals toward WCPP compliance.  
 
MilliporeSigma urges EPA to adopt a longer timeframe of 12 months for initial monitoring.  
 
  
5) 
Re-monitoring within 15 days when monitoring results indicate non-detect or 
air monitoring equipment malfunction. 
  
In the 1-BP proposed rule, EPA is proposing to require owners and operators to re-monitor 
within 15 working days after receipt of the results of any exposure monitoring when results 
indicate non-detect or air monitoring equipment malfunction, unless an Environmental 
Professional as defined at 40 CFR 312.10 or a Certified Industrial Hygienist reviews the 
monitoring results and determines re-monitoring is not necessary.  
  
When air monitoring equipment malfunctions, such situations are known prior to submitting 
the samples for laboratory analysis. The industrial hygiene professional would void these 
samples and not submit them to the analytical laboratory for analysis.  
  
Many of our locations utilize external industrial hygiene professionals to perform air 
monitoring. Re-monitoring within 15 days will be difficult to arrange with an external vendor. 
In addition, the process using 1-BP may not be done again within the 15 days. We would 
encourage EPA to use the 1-BP proposed periodic monitoring requirements as guidance to 
monitor within 3 months unless re-monitoring is determined not necessary. This will provide 
time for the monitoring to be scheduled and increase the potential the process using 1-BP will 
be performed. 
  
It is unclear why EPA is proposing the review of exposure monitoring results be done by 
Environmental Professional as defined at 40 CFR 312.10 or a Certified Industrial Hygienist. In 
reviewing 40 CFR 312.10, we do not see where it describes the skill set to evaluate air 
monitoring results for worker exposures. A CIH may not consent to reviewing air monitoring 
results when the monitoring was performed by a person outside of their direct supervision 
due to the CIH Code of Ethics. MilliporeSigma is concerned there will be a lack of available 
Environmental Professional or Certified Industrial Hygienists to conduct a review when air 
monitoring results indicate non-detect.  
  
There are highly qualified industrial hygiene professionals capable of assessing air monitoring 
results who do not hold the CIH certification. A non-detect can occur when the result is less 
than the analytical method limit of detection along with other scenarios associated with the 
sample collection. MilliporeSigma requests EPA consider an alternative approach such as 
requiring documentation be included with the air monitoring results that the monitoring 

 
5 of 6 
The life science business of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany operates as MilliporeSigma in the U.S. and Canada. 
 
 
method used could achieve results below the action level. Such actions are typically already 
done when planning air monitoring and, when done before sampling, could improve the 
sampling will obtain results below the 1-BP action level. 
 
 
6) 
VII. EPA Request for Specific Comments 
 
• 
Item #15 - EPA is also requesting comment on the proposed timeframe to 
conduct additional exposure monitoring after the cleanup of the spill or repair 
of the leak, rupture or other breakdown, as outlined in Unit IV.A.2. 
 
In the event of start-up, shutdown, spills, leaks, ruptures or other breakdowns or 
unexpected releases that may lead to employee exposure, EPA is proposing that each 
owner or operator must conduct exposure monitoring of potentially exposed persons 
(using personal breathing zone sampling) within 30 days after the conclusion of the 
start-up or shutdown and/or the cleanup of the spill or repair of the leak, rupture or 
other breakdown. 
 
The term “breakdowns” should be defined as a breakdown or failure of an engineering 
control or processing equipment.   
 
If the repair of a breakdown or start-up of the engineering controls meets or exceeds 
the prior certification or equipment performance, resampling should not be required.  
If the repair or start-up does not meet or exceed the certification or equipment 
performance, sampling should occur within 60 days of the repair of the breakdown or 
the next scheduled use of 1-BP within the process.   
  
• 
Item #40 - EPA is requesting comment on the need for and associated costs 
of ambient air monitoring, including fenceline monitoring, at fenceline 
locations; or facility emissions source monitoring, as well as information on 
the frequency and nature of air monitoring EPA should consider including as 
requirements in the final rule (such as a detection limit for 1-BP). EPA is also 
requesting comment on methods to inform fenceline communities of any 
increases of 1-BP emissions to ambient air. 
 
The Agency understands that certain engineering controls can reduce exposures to 
people inside the workplace but may lead to increased ventilation of 1-BP outside of 
the workplace, thereby increasing risks to people in fenceline communities of adverse 
health effects from exposures to 1-BP in ambient air. Therefore, EPA is proposing to 
prohibit increased releases of 1-BP to outdoor air associated with the implementation 
of the WCPP. 
 
In terms of fenceline communities and ambient air emissions of 1-BP, hazardous air 
pollutant (HAP) levels are covered by the Clean Air Act (CAA) and should not be 
included in this proposed regulation.  
 
  

 
6 of 6 
The life science business of Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany operates as MilliporeSigma in the U.S. and Canada. 
 
 
MilliporeSigma appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the 1-BP proposed rule. 
Please do not hesitate to reach out with any questions. 
  
  
Sincerely, 
 
 
Mark DiGiambattista, CHMM 
Senior Regulatory Affairs Expert, North America 
 
Nancy Kahl, CIH, CSP 
Senior Manager, Corporate Industrial Hygiene 
 
Ric Longo  
Environmental Sustainability Manager, US

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0141 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
Judah Prero 
+1 202.942.5411 Direct 
Judah.Prero@arnoldporter.com 
 
Arnold & Porter Kaye Scholer LLP 
601 Massachusetts Ave, NW  |  Washington, DC 20001-3743  |  www.arnoldporter.com 
 
September 23, 2024 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Judah Prero 
Enclosure  
ELECTRONICALLY FILED VIA REGULATIONS.ORG 
 
Bethany Masten 
Existing Chemicals Risk Management Division 
Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics 
Environmental Protection Agency, 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 
Washington, DC 20460–0001 
 
Re: 
1-Bromopropane; Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act    
89 Fed. Reg. 65066  (August 8, 2024); Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
Dear Ms. Masten: 
The Chemical Users Coalition (“CUC”) is providing the enclosed comments on 
EPA’s Proposed Regulation of 1-Bromopropane under TSCA, published in the Federal 
Register on August 8, 2024.  
 
CUC is an association of companies from diverse industries that are interested in 
chemical management policy from the perspective of those who use, rather than 
manufacture, chemical substances.1 CUC encourages the development of chemical-
regulatory policies that protect human health and the environment while simultaneously 
fostering the pursuit of technological innovation.  Aligning these goals is particularly 
important in the context of chemical management policy in a global economy.    
 
The CUC appreciates your consideration of these comments. If you have any 
questions relating to this submission, please feel free to contact me. 
 
 
 
1 The members of CUC are Airbus S.A.S., The Boeing Company, Carrier Corporation, HP Incorporated, 
IBM Company, Intel Corporation, Lockheed Martin Corporation, National Electrical Manufacturers 
Association, RTX Corporation, Sony Electronics Inc., and TDK U.S.A. Corporation. 

 
1 
 
Before the United States 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act 
89 Fed. Reg. 65066 (August 8, 2024); Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
 
 
Comments of the Chemical Users Coalition 
 
 
The Chemical Users Coalition (“CUC”) appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments. 
regarding the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA’s” and “the Agency’s”) Proposed 
Rule for the Regulation of 1-Bromopropane (1-BP) under Section 6(a) of the Toxic 
Substances Control Act (“TSCA”) (the “Proposed Rule”). CUC is an association of companies. 
from diverse industries that typically acquire and use, rather than manufacture or import, 
chemical substances. Our members depend on the availability of certain existing substances for 
which there are not technically feasible substitutes as well as a reliable pipeline for innovative 
new chemistries to be able to thrive in a competitive, global economy. Consequently, us 
members encourage EPA to develop regulatory approaches that encourage innovation and permit 
sustainability. Thus, CUC supports measures that protect health and the environment in a manner 
that enables the regulated community to pursue technological innovation simultaneously with 
economic development in the United States. This is critical in the area of chemical regulatory 
policy, which necessarily addresses emerging information about health and environmental risk. 
 
Background 
 
CUC has been an active participant in the TSCA regulatory process since the formation of the 
organization prior to the TSCA amendments in 2016 and in the Agency’s various efforts to 
implement the amendments. This has included submitting comments on EPA’s revisions to the 1-BP risk 
determination, reflecting certain policy changes surrounding TSCA risk evaluations which EPA 
announced in 2021. EPA’s final revised TSCA risk determination for 1-BP in December 2022 reflected 
these policy changes, including some with which CUC disagreed. EPA determined that 1-BP presents an 
unreasonable risk of injury to health due to the significant adverse health effects associated with exposure 
to 1-BP, including neurotoxicity, developmental toxicity from acute and chronic inhalation exposures, and 
cancer from chronic inhalation exposure.  
 
Overview of CUC Comments 
In the Proposed Rule, by allowing for use of 1-BP with controls, EPA recognizes that solvents are 
essential in many industries. As EPA has prohibited the use of other solvents, continued use of 1-BP is 
critical. CUC supports this approach. EPA is clearly focusing significantly on workplace exposures. 
However, EPA does not appear to be fully consulting with industrial hygiene experts or recognizing 
certain best practices and standards followed in the discipline of industrial hygiene. In addition, the 
exercise of EPA authority in regulating workplace practices presents significant challenges, both for the 
EPA and for the regulated community. Before EPA finalizes a risk management rule for 1-BP, it should 
provide more information to stakeholders and the public about the planned framework for the Agency’s 
compliance and enforcement efforts, and the Agency should consider whether revisions to the Proposed 

 
2 
 
Rule are needed to facilitate more effective implementation and compliance in light of the planned 
framework. Furthermore, CUC is concerned that some of the proposed measures may cause 
manufacturers to move away from 1-BP production, which will create significant problems for those 
industries that need 1-BP products. Lastly, EPA needs to be more cognizant of real-world 1-BP use 
scenarios and ensure that the phase-in of compliance mandates does not have disruptive or premature 
impacts on uses that the Proposed Rule allows to continue, including critical and essential uses and other 
environmentally beneficial uses. 
 
Industrial Use of 1-BP 
As noted by the EPA in the preamble to the Proposed Rule, 1-BP is used as a solvent in cleaning and 
degreasing operations, including vapor degreasing, cold cleaning and aerosol degreasing. EPA is allowing 
the use of 1-BP, with strict workplace controls, for these conditions of use. CUC is supportive of this 
approach. EPA has already taken action to restrict the use of a number of solvents used in these 
applications. Ensuring that industry has access to solvents needed for safe and continuous use of 
equipment and processes is extremely important. Consequently, providing for the continued permitted use 
of 1-BP is critical, and CUC appreciates that EPA has recognized such.  
 
The Workplace Chemical Protection Program 
EPA, throughout the TSCA Section 6 risk management rules proposed to date, has demonstrated a clear 
preference for requiring a WCPP to address occupational exposure concerns. CUC believes that EPA must 
build greater flexibility into the requirements under a WCPP. For example, the Proposed Rule requires 
that baseline monitoring be conducted within six months of the date of the final rule, and that under 
certain circumstances, periodic monitoring must be conducted. However, there are some conditions of use 
for which the potential for workplace exposure may occur only annually (or even less frequently), for 
example in certain batch manufacturing operations, or in a completely closed system. In certain enclosed 
systems scenarios, potential human exposures might occur only during periodic (perhaps only annual) 
maintenance. The initial monitoring requirements, and the WCPP requirements generally, do not 
differentiate between different types of workplaces and operations – they are all presumed to be the same 
and pose the same risk. EPA should make changes to the rule before issuing it in final form to permit 
flexibility in the WCPP requirements to accommodate the practical realities of a variety of manufacturing 
operations and practices.  
For example, EPA is proposing to require recurring five-year periodic exposure monitoring. In the 
alternative, CUC suggests that EPA create a new option for circumstances where 1-BP is present in the 
product/process, but the initial monitoring demonstrates that 1-BP was not detected in a statistically 
significant level. In such circumstances, further periodic monitoring would not be required as long as 
there has been no change to the process/controls. At minimum, there should be a mechanism to allow for 
less frequent monitoring. If a process has not changed and the WCPP is in place and working, continued 
monitoring will not change the (absence of) exposure. 
Another operational aspect of the WCPP that CUC believes needs to be addressed concerns the 
identification of the responsible entity for WCPP implementation and compliance. The term 
“owner/operator” for the entity responsible for implementation of the WCPP at a facility is much more 
broadly defined than terms that are currently used for standards overseen by the Occupational Safety and 

 
3 
 
Health Administration (“OSHA”). This language change means that “owners/operators” – not employers 
– are now responsible for providing respiratory protection and other personal protective equipment to 
more than their direct employees. For a facility that may have many contractors present, the new 
compliance mandate could create enormous complexities. This approach, unless significant changes are 
implemented, will be confusing and impractical, and will create tensions between EPA rules and OSHA 
rules and lead to confusion and potential compliance issues. CUC therefore recommends that EPA adopt 
the approach of requiring “employers” to be the entities responsible for providing respiratory protection 
and other PPE to their employees. The owner/operator could be the entity responsible for ensuring 
compliance with WCPP. For example, the owner/operator could be responsible for ensuring that training 
of those working in its facilities is completed; however, the employer would be the entity responsible for 
providing the training. This language change would be consistent with current OSHA practice and ensure 
protections are in place while not being overly burdensome. 
CUC Members generally support EPA’s objective as stated in the Proposed Regulation that facilities 
should implement the WCPP “in accordance with the hierarchy of controls” and to use “pollution 
prevention to control exposures whenever practicable.” Nevertheless, CUC Members do not agree that the 
terms of the 1-BP regulation should mandate that companies implementing the WCPP requirements 
should need to create records or otherwise document that they have “evaluate[d] elimination, substitution, 
engineering controls or administrative exposure controls strategies and the reason why they found these 
strategies infeasible to control exposures below the [existing chemical exposure limit (ECEL)].” While 
industrial hygiene professionals work with their colleagues to implement the hierarchy of controls when 
determining the most appropriate methods to mitigate workplace exposures to chemical substances, CUC 
considers it to be unnecessary for EPA (and presumably its enforcement staff) to require a business to 
create records reflecting how such determinations were made. This is especially concerning to CUC 
Members because in many cases where 1-BP has been in use for decades or more, such analyses would 
have been made years ago and newly required records may need to be created (or recreated). This 
requirement is unworkable and should be abandoned before the rule is finalized. 
Additionally, EPA is requesting comment on whether owners/operators should be required to attest to 
whether and why the exposure controls they have selected would not result in increased air releases of 1-
BP to the atmosphere from the workplace and keep records of that statement as part of the WCPP 
exposure control plan. CUC believes that such attestation is unnecessary and should not be required. This 
is another burdensome documentation requirement that complicates compliance. Rather than attesting, 
this information should be documented through the results of the sampling done when the process 
changes.  
EPA also has requested comments concerning an owner’s/operator’s ability to conduct initial monitoring 
within six months after date of publication of the final rule, and anticipated timelines for any procedural 
adjustments needed to comply with the requirements outlined in this unit, including establishment of a 
respiratory protection program and development of an exposure control plan. CUC believes that EPA 
must lengthen these compliance timeframes in order to allow for ease of achieving compliance with the 
rule. A large corporation with many different types of processes will need time to work through how the 
new requirements impact company operations and processes and determine the application of the new 
requirements to the various products and processes that use 1-BP. 
A general concern of CUC members is the lack of consistency of WCPP requirements from one risk 
management rule to the next. EPA needs to create a consistent framework for each rule that allows for a 
chemical’s continued use with a WCPP. The required programs will be easier to comply with when each 
chemical’s risk management rule follows a consistent program outline with a “generalized" WCPP having 

 
4 
 
the capability of being applicable to many substances and minimizing differences for occupational health 
requirements between regulated substances. CUC acknowledges that there may be circumstances of use 
of a specific chemical that warrant additional measures under a WCPP. However, the general framework 
for the WCPP should be the same from one chemical to the next, and that is not the case. EPA should 
address this issue for 1-BP and all other similar TSCA section 6 rules that it will be issuing.  
CUC members have general concerns about the approach taken to occupational exposures. Threshold 
Limit Values (“TLVs”) developed by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists 
(“ACGIH”) are accepted as the standard for workplace exposures throughout industry. The options that 
EPA has discussed for WCPP compliance (respirator use and specific dermal protection) are not 
necessarily the industry accepted practices. EPA’s deviation from using best industrial hygiene practices 
and standards will lead to confusion and difficulties in risk communication. Employees who are 
accustomed to working with the understanding that ACGIH TLVs are the best practice may question this 
as EPA issues values that deviate drastically for specific substances. Additionally, having two agencies 
with concurrent jurisdiction over the exact same setting, albeit with differing standards, will only lead to 
confusion. To date, EPA has not disclosed how EPA and/or OSHA will both support and/or enforce 
workplace safety measures, and whether EPA even has the requisite expertise to do so.  
Compliance Timeframe Impacts on Supply Chains for Continuing Uses  
EPA should consider longer compliance timeframes for the specific prohibitions on manufacturing, 
processing, and distributing of 1-BP to avoid disruptions in supply chains for continuing uses, including 
critical and essential and other beneficial uses. The proposed timeframes are relatively short and likely not 
to be practicable at the supply chain level. As a practical matter, it can be anticipated that the Proposed 
Rule, if finalized with its compliance timeframes, will cause certain producers of 1-BP to leave the 
market, potentially cutting off supply for continuing critical uses. This is likely to have unforeseen 
economic impacts which EPA has not accounted for in its regulatory analyses and may increase the 
possibility of “regrettable substitution” in response.  
EPA should include longer phaseout periods for the prohibitions or consider other strategies to ensure that 
the supply remains available for critical, essential, and other continuing uses of 1-BP.  
De Minimis Levels, By-products, Impurities, and Articles 
EPA did not include a de minims level on concentration for 1-BP in the Proposed Rule, although it 
requested comments on whether one should be included. CUC supports inclusion of a de minimis level of 
concentrations less than 0.1% by weight. EPA should clarify that the presence of 1-BP as an impurity or 
by-product in a substance would not subject that substance or mixture to the proposed ban. In the same 
way EPA has excluded impurities and by-products from other regulations under TSCA (such as for 
purposes of Chemical Data Reporting), EPA should explicitly exclude trace amounts of 1-BP as an 
impurity or by-product from the prohibitions. CUC therefore supports an exclusion for 1-BP that is not 
intentionally added.  
EPA requested comments as to whether the presence of 1-BP in articles should be expressly from the 
restrictions. CUC believes that EPA should explicitly exclude 1-BP from the restrictions when present in 
manufactured articles. There are substantial constraints on the ability of entities who import articles that 
may contain 1-BP to determine whether such articles do in fact contain 1-BP. In light of the fact that no 
risk from exposure to 1-BP in articles has been identified, the final rule should explicitly state that articles 
containing 1-BP are exempt from restrictions. 

 
5 
 
Additionally, to avoid confusion, the final rule should define “article,” and define the term in the same 
way it has defined article in the contexts of other regulatory requirements under TSCA (e.g. the final rule 
for methylene chloride). 
CUC also recommends that EPA explicitly exclude from the restrictions 1-BP when used for research and 
development purposes. The Proposed Rule does not address this condition of use. EPA, by establishing 
compliance timeframes, is providing time for users of 1-BP to explore alternative substances to determine 
their technical feasibility in specific conditions of use. Such research and development efforts will likely 
require comparative tests and studies that will, by necessity, require use of 1-BP. To promote such efforts 
and to avoid any confusion in the regulated community, EPA should explicitly state both in the final rule 
and in the preamble thereto that use of 1-BP in research and development efforts is fully exempt from the 
restrictions. 
Self-Certification 
EPA has proposed that most owners and/or operators who implement a WCPP to self-certify as to their 
implementation and compliance with the WCPP, including a point-of-sale self-certification to purchase 
and then use 1-BP. This requirement is overly burdensome and adds little, if anything at all, to ensuring 
compliance other than adding an additional layer of bureaucracy. If a facility is required to implement a 
WCPP, that obligation exists irrespective of an obligation to self-certify. If a facility, either inadvertently 
or intentionally, fails to comply with WCPP requirements, the self-certification will not address that. 
Mistakes are mistakes, and willful violations are willful violations. The self-certification requirements 
simply overburden those entities who are already complying with the substantive WCPP requirements by 
adding a paperwork burden, which serves to disincentivize the manufacture of 1-BP. The requirement also 
creates logististical implementation challenges, due the number of different actors involved in 
manufacturing, sales and distribution of product. CUC strongly recommends that this provision be 
removed.  
 
Federal Contractors 
CUC believes that EPA needs to better understand how entities operate in the aerospace and defense 
sectors, particularly under government contracts. The Proposed Rule contains provisions that allow for 
extended compliance timeframes for government entities and contractors. However, in many instances, 
the work that a contractor does for non-federal work is performed using the same equipment and at the 
same location where federal contract work is being performed. Such facilities can’t simply meet specific 
WCPP compliance mandates for specific non-federal contract tasks. The facility as a whole would need to 
meet federal contract requirements and standards, irrespective of the specific work being performed at 
any given point in time. Accordingly, EPA should clarify that the extended compliance timeframes apply 
to government contractors broadly, not simply when they are engaged in government contract specific 
tasks.    
Conclusion  
CUC supports EPA’s efforts to appropriately manage risks presented by high priority substances. CUC 
appreciates the effort that EPA is expending to more appropriately tailor risk management requirements to 
specific conditions of use. However, CUC believes that EPA has more work to do to ensure that the 
Proposed Rule is consistent with well accepted industrial hygiene principles and requirements under the 
jurisdiction of OSHA. Accordingly, CUC asks that EPA take a closer look at real-world and generally 

 
6 
 
accepted industrial hygiene practices, existing requirements under OHSA, and adjust requirements in the 
Proposed Rule accordingly.  
CUC Members would be glad to make themselves available to discuss any questions EPA personnel may 
have concerning CUC’s comments and/or to discuss any issues related to the Agency efforts to evaluate 
and to mitigate risks associated with the use of high priority substances.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0144 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
September 23, 2024 
 
Existing Chemicals Risk Management Division 
Office of Pollution Prevention and  Toxics 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave NW 
 
Washington, D.C. 20460-0001 
Submitted via Federal eRulemaking Portal 
 
 
RE: 
 1-Bromopropane (1-BP) proposed regulation  
 
 
 Docket: EPA-HQ OPPT-2020-0471 
 
 
 89 Fed. Reg. 65066 (August 8, 2024) 
 
 
 
Enviro Tech International, Inc. (Enviro Tech) respectfully submits comments on 
EPA’s proposed rulemaking to address alleged unreasonable risk of injury to human 
health presented by 1-bromoprane (1-BP; Chemical Abstracts Service Registry Number® 
[CAS RN®] 106-94-5). Enviro Tech is a top supplier of stabilized n-propyl bromide and 
fluorinated solvents for industrial parts cleaning applications. Founded in 1994, Enviro 
Tech has grown into the industry-leading provider of these solvents.  Enviro Tech’s 
comments, here, address only proposed workplace exposure limits. 
 
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA)’ s proposed rule would ban all 
consumer uses of 1-BP, except in insulation, and some industrial and commercial uses.  
Although the proposed rule does not – outright -- ban all commercial/industrial use of 1-
BP (e.g., vapor and aerosol degreasing, electronics, and electronic and metal products), 
the proposed 0.05 ppm existing chemical exposure limit (ECEL) is unattainable in existing 
and newly manufactured open top style vapor degreasers, constituting a blanket 
prohibition masquerading as mere regulation. In short, non-federal workplaces could not 
implement a Workplace Chemical Protection Program (WCPP) ensuring compliance with 
the 0.05 ppm eight-hour, time-weighted average (8-hr TWA) ECEL. The proposed rule 
operates as a ban on use of 1-BP. 
 
EPA lacks authority under Section 6(b) to regulate indoor workplace exposures 
 
 
EPA lacks authority to regulate solely indoor exposures to 1-BP.  Section 6(b) of 
the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), as amended by the Lautenberg Act, directs 
EPA to regulate “occupational exposures”. However, nowhere does TSCA Section 6(b) 
confer authority to regulate “any” or “all” occupational exposures, including solely indoor 
exposures with no ‘environmental’ component. Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo, 
144 S.Ct. 2244 (2024), overturned the Chevron presumption that agencies acted within 
statutory authority. Loper directs courts to exercise independent judgment in determining 
whether agency action falls within statutory authority”. Loper, 144 S. Ct. at 2273. The 
agency has not identified clear bases for purporting to regulate occupational exposures 
that occur solely and exclusively indoors, with no threat or impact on the ‘environment’. 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
2 
 
 
 
Non-environmental workplace exposures are set by the U.S. Occupational Safety 
and Health Administration (OSHA).  Although EPA may perceive limitations on OSHA’s 
evaluation of workplace exposures, that perception does not confer upon EPA the 
authority to regulate solely, indoor workplace activities with no component of 
environmental impacts or threat. EPA exceeded its statutory mandate in attempting to 
establish a “one-size-fits-all” exposure limit by treating every “Potentially Exposed or 
Susceptible Subpopulation” as the same, when worker exposure is different and the 
toxicology implications are not the same.  EPA’s purported action exceeds the Lautenberg 
Act’s direction and is inconsistent with TSCA’s plain language. 
 
EPA can regulate occupational exposures by regulating outdoor exposures 
 
 
EPA possesses authority to protect “potentially exposed or susceptible 
subpopulations” (PESS)…at greater risk than the general population of adverse health 
effects from a chemical substance.”  PESS includes “infants, children, pregnant women, 
workers, or the elderly”. (15 USC 2602(12).) EPA can protect PESS “workers”, by 
establishing regulations to address actual and potential outdoor (“environmental”) 
exposures. For example only, consistent with the Lautenberg Act, EPA could regulate 1-
BP emissions which potentially implicate worker exposures in outdoor areas, such as a 
work yard, or which involve potential exposures to surface water, groundwater or 
impacted soils. Such regulations clearly fall within EPA’s authority to protect and preserve 
the “Environment”. But it exceeds EPA’s authority to regulate exposures which occur 
solely and exclusively indoors, with no threat or impact on the environment.   
 
Imposing a 0.05 ppm ECEL is a prohibition masquerading as a regulation 
 
 
EPA repeatedly stated it is not proposing to ban all conditions of use of 1-BP, 
specifically allowing 1-BP for specified industrial uses, including vapor degreasing with 
appropriate worker protections including a WCPP. (89 Fed. Reg. 65066, 65069, August 
8, 2024.) However, proposed section 40 CFR 751.807, which establishes the WCPP 
requirements, proposes a technically unattainable (8-hr TWA ECEL) of 0.05 ppm that 
cannot be met by existing “open top” vapor degreasers, which are the most common form 
of the machine. Included as Attachment A please find comments by Patrick Oliver, who 
has 33 years’ experience in the vapor degreasing industry, whose experience is relevant 
and instructive regarding impacts of the pending proposal. Mr. Oliver concludes it will be 
“impossible to meet the 1-BP operative exposure limit of 0.05 ppm.”  Because no entity 
can meet the 0.05 ppm standard with existing equipment, the proposal is a prohibition---
which EPA specifically denies intending. Below please find my separate comments 
explaining how this proposed “regulation” is actually a “prohibition” in real-life application. 
 
Since 1994, 1-bromopropane has been used successfully as a vapor degreasing 
solvent with physical properties making it ideal for vapor degreasing and other high 
precision cleaning needs. 1-BP does not deplete the ozone layer (SNAP approved, 2007); 
has a very low Global Warming Potential; is non-flammable pursuant to OSHA (OSHA 
2021) and DOT regulations and possesses a boiling point higher than many other vapor 
degreasing solvents which EPA may have identified as possible substitutes. 1BP solvents 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
3 
 
superbly clean contaminants from substrates and can be used on a wide variety of 
substrates without negative impacts. 
 
Enviro Tech is a specialist in precision cleaning, which includes vapor degreasing 
as well as smaller-use cleaning systems. Over our 27-year history, Enviro Tech has 
become the predominant formulator of US-based 1BP solvents marketing our 
trademarked EnSolv and producing products under private labels sold by other brand 
names. Our records show between 6 to 8 million pounds of neat 1BP used each year in 
the precision cleaning sector, with that number reduced year over year for the past three 
years. 
 
These comments do not apply to EPA’s proposed ban on consumer, dry cleaning 
and adhesives sector uses of 1BP products. Enviro Tech has not/does not sell in these 
categories and makes all efforts to prevent such uses. Our market knowledge and 
experience show that very little, if any, 1BP used in these sectors. The focus of these 
comments relates to vapor degreasing and other precision cleaning methods in industrial 
use. Our silence regarding the proposed ban on consumer dry cleaning and adhesives 
sector uses should not be interpreted as agreement or endorsement of the proposed rule 
in these areas. 
 
As relates to the vapor degreasing sector, the proposed rule imposes numerous 
conditions on 1BP use which constitute a de-facto ban. 
 
A manufacturer using vapor degreasing to clean products has five major concerns. 
1BP solvents meet the vast majority of users’ parameter demands for each of these 
concerns, including: 
 
1) 
Material cost; 
2) 
Effectiveness; 
3) 
Compatibility with the material to be cleaned; 
4) 
Stability of Supply; and, 
5) 
Health & Safety. 
 
The main industrial alternative to 1BP solvents is 1,2,-trans-dichloroethylene 
(TDCE; CAS RN: 156-60-5)/fluorinated compound mixtures, which may be effective in 
some uses. TDCE/fluorinated compound mixtures’ compatibility with substrates is similar 
to 1BP solvents, so effectiveness and compatibility are not at issue. 
 
Regulations have unintended consequences. For example, in 2021 EPA 
announced phase-out of hydrofluorochlorocarbon (HCFC) and HCFC-containing 
products.  Within a year and one half of the implementation, Solvay, the world’s only 
manufacturer of HCFC 365 ceased production, well before the statutory phase out was 
scheduled to end. Given the current proposal’s likelihood to quickly destroy 1BP usage, 
it is reasonable to expect 1BP raw material manufacturers and/or solvent formulators to 
discontinue production due to compliance costs and diminishing sales. The risk to 1BP 
users is the great and needless loss to those users who first choose investment in control 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
4 
 
technologies where the product may no longer available. Thus, the proposed rule 
negatively impacts supply stability regarding 1BP based solvents. 
 
Similarly, the proposed rule negatively impacts manufacturers’ cost concerns. A 
manufacturer wanting to continue using 1BP solvents is prohibited “except for uses 
continued under the WCPP, self-certification and/or prescriptive controls”  (Proposed 
Rule page 65081) -- all instituting a draconian workplace exposure level of a 0.05 ppm 8-
hr TWA ECEL. The WCPP would necessitate unnecessarily burdensome “monitoring, 
training, recordkeeping, and other requirements to help ensure that the threshold is not 
exceeded.” Proposed Rule p. 65082. 
 
Extra costs are imposed at each step. The WCPP itself will require legal and 
consultant assistance, as each user must establish an initial baseline monitoring sample 
to determine exposures. Additional monitoring is necessary within 30 days after each 
change in the workplace or work practices. If it could be met, meeting the 0.05 ppm 8-hr 
TWA ECEL will require, in most cases, new manufacturing equipment, new ventilation 
systems and other physical changes in the workplace in addition to additional training 
costs record keeping expenses. 
 
Compliance with the excessively stringent new standard will increase raw material 
costs and formulation expense, which will be passed on to the user and ultimately the 
consumer. Additionally, user costs increase with each step of compliance, from preparing 
a WCPP to the never-ending cost of continuous exposure monitoring. All of these 
additional – supposedly one time -- and continuous costs needlessly subvert the cost 
advantage of 1BP solvents over competing technologies and will also be passed on to 
consumers. 
 
 
Costs skyrocket again when compliance requires new equipment or physical plant 
changes like new/revised ventilation systems, which are merely a regulatorily imposed 
“gamble” on producers.  In 2023, Enviro Tech installed a new, mid-line sized “open top” 
NESHAP compliant vapor degreaser at a cost of over $90,000. Physical plant 
modifications added $35,000 to the bill. This new equipment was designed by the most 
knowledgeable professionals in vapor degreasing design and manufacture – but it cannot 
meet the proposed 8-hr TWA ECEL of 0.05 ppm, even with use of personal protective 
equipment (PPE). 
 
Enviro Tech calculates the addition of WCPP, self-certification, prescriptive 
controls, continuous monitoring, training, record keeping, etc. to the cost of the degreaser 
project would add one-time costs of over $70,000 and continuous costs of over $10,000 
per year without factoring in a likely rise in the cost of 1BP solvent. Adding lip exhaust 
machinery and extra ventilation to reduce emissions to approach 0.05 ppm were 
calculated at over $120,000 for material and installation - without guarantees the ECEL 
would or could be met by the manufacturer. In all, compliance with proposed regulation 
results in a $325,000 “gamble” with no guarantee of successfully meeting the ECEL, 
along with a continuing annual cost of at least $10,000 per year, if the degreaser were to 
use 1BP solvents. 
 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
5 
 
So, Enviro Tech chose to use its TDCE/fluorinated product instead of our proven 
1BP technology in the new vapor degreaser. The obvious question is, if experts in vapor 
degreasing machinery doubt the ECEL can be met and the leading experts in 1BP solvent 
chemistry conclude that the cost of compliance with the proposed rule is too great to use 
a proven 1BP product, why would any other user decide otherwise? A simple and highly 
rational answer is: they won’t. 
 
It is an easy business decision to avoid speculative and unnecessary huge capital 
outlays (by switching solvent) to extricate one’s business from a never ending regulatory 
morass by switching solvents. That is what happened throughout the history of solvent 
regulation under the SNAP program. Users of Freon, 1,1,2-trichloroethane (TCA; CAS 
RN: 79-00-5) and other banned solvents switched to hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), HFEs, 
trichloroethylene (TCE; CAS RN: 79-01-6) and 1BP instead of opting for new or different 
cleaning systems. The same is already happening, with 1BP use declining in the current 
and last two years after three years of steady but non-increasing usage in prior years. 
One major vapor degreasing manufacturer reports that only 5% of new machines being 
currently ordered are intended to use 1BP solvents. 
 
Businesses minimize costs and employee time of non-producing activities; 
consequently, EPA’s proposed regulation will drive solvent change. However, alternate 
solvent choices are limited if the goal is to use existing equipment. The alternative choices 
available to today’s users are TDCE mixtures, which boil at a lower temperature and lack 
the same cleaning efficacy as 1BP solvents, sometimes causing production issues.  Other 
than TCE and PERC, there are no other non-flammable solvents readily available for use 
in existing vapor degreasers which match or exceed the cleaning efficacy of 1BP solvents. 
 
Vapor degreaser operators have and will change to mixtures of TDCE and various 
fluorinated compounds because doing so is the only real choice available for existing 
equipment (thus avoiding a huge capital equipment outlay). These solvents will be 
acquired at a higher cost (between $2,000 to $3,000 per drum) than 1BP solvents. Other 
solvent replacements for existing vapor degreasers are limited to pure fluorinated 
compounds which lack comparable cleaning efficacy and are priced at $4,000 to $10,000 
more than 1 BP solvents. 
 
The cost increase will continue over time, which results in overall inflation for 
consumers, but solvent substitution presents additional concerns beyond increased 
costs. 
 
HFEs are used in TDCE mixtures largely to negate the flash point of TDCE, thereby 
allowing the mixture to be “non-flammable” pursuant to OSHA and DOT regulations. 3M 
recently announced it will discontinue production of fluorinated compounds used in TDCE 
mixtures.  As a result there will be no U.S. manufacturers of products (mainly 
hydrofluoroether HFEs) used in TDCE mixtures. The only remaining source of fluorinated 
compounds for use in TDCE mixtures is China, a foreign entity of concern. (89 Fed. Reg. 
37079; May 6, 2024). TDCE products without HFEs are not useable in existing U.S. vapor 
degreasers. 
 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
6 
 
HFE products present multiple issues. First, HFE products used in TDCE mixtures 
have one fully fluorinated carbon, which makes them per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances 
(PFAS) under the definition used by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD).  In the U.S., all HFE’s normally used in TDCE mixtures are PFAS 
per the definition set forth in 40 CFR 704.3. Further, it is widely accepted in the market 
and in consulting circles that EPA will likely define PFAS in the same way as OECD.  
 
Secondly, nearly all HFEs used in TDCE mixtures have high or very high global 
warming potentials, which add additional concerns considering the recent phase out of 
HCFC compounds (which were also used in TDCE mixtures) due to global warming 
concerns. 
 
Also, both sides of the political spectrum favor additional tariffs on Chinese 
products, which raises costs.   
 
Additionally, there are genuine supply chain dangers from tensions between 
China, Taiwan, The Philippines and the U.S., in which case TDCE mixtures could be 
eliminated with no domestic replacement for the HFE compounds used in these mixtures. 
  
Currently, China is the largest U.S. supplier of TDCE. The sole U.S. producer of 
TDCE has been unable to keep-up with current demand.  Although there are reports that 
the U.S. supplier will be scaling production, there is no known time frame for this, which 
raises additional supply chain concerns. As discussed above, TDCE is unusable as a 
standalone substance in existing vapor degreasing equipment due to its flammability. So, 
even with a possible increasing amount of domestic supply of TDCE, the lack of HFE 
products manufactured in the US to create non-flammable mixtures raises serious 
concerns with supply stability of usable TDCE mixtures. 
 
Although HFE compounds are currently used in TDCE mixtures, there are new 
compounds, HFOs, which can also be added to TDCE to address flammability issues. 
Currently, neat HFO is usable for this purpose, costing from $4,000 to $9,000 per drum 
more than comparable HFE compounds. TDCE mixtures will likely remain from $2,000 to 
$4,000 per drum more expensive than comparable 1BP solvents, but this could rise to 
$6,000 per drum, if using HFO compounds. 
 
There is much trepidation in industry regarding EPA’s TSCA review of TDCE. 
Many are rightly concerned that EPA will treat TDCE the same way as perchloroethylene 
(PERC; CAS RN: 127-18-4), trichloroethylene (TCE; CAS RN: 79-01-6) and 1BP, leaving 
manufacturers with few options and unnecessarily increased costs. To reduce costs and 
regulatory constraints, we see large, multi-national companies off-shoring manufacturing 
to Mexico and Asia.  Regulating TDCE mixtures similarly to 1BP would add to increasing 
reasons to off-shore manufacturing. 
 
Cost is the driving force when users considering how to comply with the proposed 
rule, whether by attempting compliance with ECEL or by solvent substitution. As 
discussed above, substitution is the rational business response; but is problematic based 
compliance time-lines in the proposed rule.   

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
7 
 
 
One immediate concern is whether an alternative solvent is applicable to the user’s 
specific manufacturing purpose. In many cases, applicability and compatibility must be 
verified by third-parties before use in production.  Below is a comprehensive but not 
exhaustive list of tests our best-selling 1BP solvent has “passed” -- all of which must be 
satisfactorily completed for each new alternative prior to use:  
 
• 
AAI Engineering Support (Ft. Knox USA), – cleaning of M-1 and M-2 tank 
 
simulator PCBs 
• 
Airbus / British Aerospace, ABR 9-0140 - Issue 5A Type 1 Non-Metallic 
Material Specification General Purpose Cleaning Solvent 
• 
Airbus, 80-T-35-0014, Process Specification, Cleaning with Organic 
Solvents (Cold Cleaning Agents) 
• 
Airbus, ABP 8-1294 Issue 9- Vapor Degreasing, Flush Cleaning, Immersion 
or Spraying, Cold Cleaning Solvent Immersion or SWAB / Wipe Type 3 
• 
Air Liquide (France) – Cleaning Oxygen lines Anniston Army Depot – 
cleaning of M1-A1 tank parts 
• 
ASTM, D6368-06 - Stabilized n-Propyl Bromide for use in Vapor Degreasing 
• 
ASTM, F 945 - Stress Corrosion of Titanium Alloys by Aircraft Maintenance 
Materials (Method A) 
• 
Bell Helicopters, Process Engineering Order: BPS 4138 Revision E-2, 
Materials Bulletin 1918 - n-Propyl Bromide, Vapor Degreasing Grade 
• 
BOC, PLM-02-02-BOC – Guidelines for Oxygen Cleaning 
• 
BOC, Spec 399856, Doc # 50000810, Cleaning, Degreasing & Packaging 
for Oxygen Duty 
• 
Boeing D6-17487 Revision L, Exterior & General Cleaners & Liquid 
 
Waxes 
• 
Boeing Military Aerospace, PS 12020 Revision Y - Vapor Degreasing 
Specification - allows use of EnSolv-5408 and EnSolv Spec 490 Stabilizer 
Booster in certain vapor degreasing applications on military aircraft such as 
the F-15, F-16 and F-18. 
• 
Boeing, BAC 5408 - Vapor Degreasing 
• 
Boeing, BMS 11-11 - Stabilized n-Propyl Bromide 
• 
Boeing, D6-17487 Revision L – Exterior & General Cleaners & Liquid 
Waxes 
• 
Boeing, HP9-25 Revision U- Degreasing, Apache Helicopter 
• 
Boeing, PSD 6-62 - Process Specification Deviation to BAC 5408 - allows 
use of EnSolv-5408 and EnSolv Spec 490 Stabilizer Booster in certain 
vapor degreasing applications 
• 
Bombardier, EMCM-001 (ASTM D6368) - n-Propyl Bromide, Aerospace 
Vapor Degreasing Grade Montreal Facility (5805320 SAP) 
• 
Bombardier, P. Spec. 407 Issue 12 – Chemical & Electro-Chemical 
Treatment for metal parts 
• 
Chilworth Technology, Flash Point Testing 
• 
Corpus Christi Army Depot, Vapor degreasing GE & Pratt & Whitney 
engines for use on UH-60 and Blackhawk helicopters 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
8 
 
• 
Delco Defense Systems Operations, – Vapor degreasing PCBs for thermal 
imaging systems 
• 
Directory of Cleaning Agents for Oxygen Service produced by Compressed 
Gas Association 
• 
Douglas Aircraft Company (now Boeing), CSD #1 - General Purpose 
Cleaner, test performed by SMI, Inc 
• 
Effect on Painted Surfaces Test (ASTM F 502) 
• 
Residue Test (ASTM F 485, passed AMS 4911 and AMS 4049) 
• 
Sandwich Corrosion Test 
• 
2024-T3 Bare/Alodined per MIL-C-5541 
• 
2024-T3 Bare/Anodized per MIL-A-8625 
• 
2024-T3 Clad/Alodined per MIL-C-5541 
• 
2024-T3 Clad/Anodized per MIL-A-8625 
• 
7075-T6 Clad/Alodined per MIL-C-5541 
• 
7075-T6 Clad/Anodized per MIL-A-8625 
• 
Immersion Corrosion Test (ASTM F 483) 
• 
Cadmium Removal Test (per MIL-S-18729, ASTM F 1111) 
• 
Hydrogen Embrittlement Test (ASTM F 519, Type 1C) 
• 
Embraer, NE40-012 REV.BP – Metallic Parts Cleaning 
• 
Flash Point Tests – ASTM-D-56; ASTM-D-93; ISO 13736 :1997; BS2000 
PART 170 1995 
• 
Food & Drug Administration - Specifically for use as a carrier in food grade 
equipment lubricants, such as a chain lubricant in a food processing 
machine. 
• 
GE Appendix F, Recommended Practice for Certifying Agent Approval of 
Cleaning Products Used on Metallic Jet Engine Hardware 
• 
GE Specification D50TF8-S7, Temporary Marking Materials for Engine 
Parts 
• 
General Motors, FID 950603 – Vapor Degreasing & Cold Cleaning 
• 
Goodrich Aerospace, 5702ENSOLV5408 
• 
Gulfstream Aerospace Corporation Material Process Specification per 
 
ENG-SOP-0274 
• 
Specification: GAMPS 4112 Revision B - Solvent Wipe Cleaning: 
 
• 
Standards: GAF14A – Individual Finish and Process Codes 
 
• 
Military Specification: Mil-S-5002 
• 
SAE AMS 3819 - Cloths - Cleaning for Aircraft Primary and 
Secondary Structural Surfaces. 
• 
IMP Aerospace (Canada) - Vapor degreasing of sub-assemblies on CP-140 
Aurora anti-submarine aircraft and the Sikorsky Sea King helicopter 
• 
Litton Guidance and Control, – Vapor degreasing PCBs for military space 
 
applications 
• 
Lockheed Martin Supplier, # EXO109420963 
• 
Lockheed Martin, EMAP G41.149, Version: 10- Vapor Degreasing Solvent 
• 
Lockheed Martin, STP57-301, Rev. W- Process Specification Cleaning of 
Aluminum and Aluminum Alloys 
• 
Military Specification, MIL P28809 - Printed Circuit Cleaning 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
9 
 
• 
NASA White Sands Test Facility, – Solvent Removal Following Oxygen 
System Cleaning 
• 
NASA, GOX - Mechanical Impact Testing 
• 
NASA, LOX - Mechanical Impact Testing 
• 
Naval Surface Warfare Center, – Cleaning sub-assemblies on the Mark 42,  
 
Mark 45 5" guns and Mark 20 6" guns 
• 
Northrup Grumman PEI (Puerto Rico) – Vapor degreasing electronic 
components of torpedo warheads 
• 
Pacific Aerospace and Electronics; Display Division, – Vapor degreasing of 
electromagnetic relays for Defense satellites 
• 
Panasonic Mobile Communications 
• 
Pratt & Whitney / United Technologies, PWA 36604 - Compatibility with 
PWA  407 Rubber 
• 
Pratt & Whitney / United Technologies, PWA 36604 - Hot Corrosion Testing 
of Standard Gas Turbine Engine Alloys 
• 
Praxair, GS-38 – Guidelines for Oxygen Cleaning 
• 
SAE, AMS 1526B - Cleaner for Aircraft Exterior Surfaces Water-Miscible, 
Pressure-Spraying Type 
• 
SAE, AMS 2644 - (Originally MIL-I-25135E Class: 1 & 1A) Class 1 Solvent 
Remover for NDT Penetrant Testing, Dept of the Air Force 
• 
SAE, ARP 1176 - Oxygen System and Component Cleaning and Packaging 
• 
SAE, ARP 1755B - Effect of Cleaning Agents on Aircraft Engine Materials 
Stock Loss Test Method 
• 
Schneider Group (France) 
• 
Turkish Air Force, – 1st Maintenance Supply Center 
• 
United Defense LP, – Vapor Degreasing for sub-assemblies of Naval Guns 
• 
US Coast Guard, – Cold flush cleaning of air conditioners on the Dolphin 
 
helicopter 
• 
USAF– Cleaning PCBs on C-117 simulators 
 
Based on our 27 years of experience, the cost of completing similar tests for TDCE 
mixtures is in the range of $250,000 and could require two years – for each product. 
Further, the costs and time required are multiplied by each different mixture. A review of 
Enviro Tech’s records shows more than one hundred separate tests have been 
completed for Enviro Tech’s family of 1BP solvents. Enviro Tech estimates costs will 
approach $1,000,000 to duplicate the test results for an alternative full line of TDCE 
solvents, with repetitions for each new mixtures with compounds other than HFEs. 
 
Testing is necessary for each specific product variant, and for different 
manufacturers.  Consequently, even if competing manufacturers have similar products, 
both must test to ensure product quality. Thus, multiple manufacturers will incur 
substantial redundant and overlapping verification costs, which Enviro Tech does not 
believe was considered by EPA.  These costs will be passed on to users and then to 
consumers, all adding to inflation.  Also, testing labs may not have the capacity to 
complete the desired tests in a time frame necessary under the proposed rule. 
 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
10 
 
Although qualifying/verifying tests for 1BP were completed over multiple years, 
EPA’s proposed timeline for compliance would require alternatives testing be commenced 
and completed quickly, requiring needless planning, tracking, testing, record keeping, etc. 
during the transition period, all of which become irrelevant if and when positive results are 
produced for the intended substitute. 
 
Another major concern is the availability of new equipment, including airless 
degreasers and equipment to modify existing machinery. The Enviro Tech degreaser 
discussed above took over four months to build and deliver plus three weeks for 
installation, ventilation and space modifications. Although Enviro Tech does not anticipate 
a large increase in new machinery by 1BP users, if that were to happen, it would take 
many years for the number of machines and other equipment to be produced to meet that 
demand.  According to a manufacturer of airless degreasers, current production time is 
up to more than a year.  Therefore, it would be impossible for users to meet the timelines 
set forth in the proposed rule.  
 
 
 
    Alternative Substances for 1BP Have Comparable Hazard  
 
 
    Concerns or Unknown or Limited Hazard Information 
 
 
 
Available alternatives to 1BP, albeit with inferior performance, have comparable 
hazard concerns to 1BP or unknown/limited hazard information. EPA’s proposed rule 
would require entities to change from a chemical with well-known/well-characterized 
hazards to chemicals with comparable hazard concerns to 1BP or to chemicals with 
unknown or poorly characterized hazards. EPA has not considered the unintended 
consequences of its proposed rule, which will serve as a de facto ban, and will drive 
regrettable substitution. 
 
 
TSCA Section 6(c)(2)(C) states in part that:1 
 
 
[I]n deciding whether to prohibit or restrict in a manner that 
substantially prevents a specific condition of use of a chemical substance 
or mixture, and in setting an appropriate transition period for such action, 
the Administrator shall consider, to the extent practicable, whether 
technically and economically feasible alternatives that benefit health or 
the environment, compared to the use so proposed to be prohibited or 
restricted…(emphasis added). 
 
 
EPA’s assessment of alternatives does not meet this legal standard. As discussed 
previously, available alternatives are barely technically or economically feasible and 
inadequately tested for all replacement uses.  Based on EPA’s own analysis, the available 
alternatives do not benefit health or the environment. In fact, in terms of environment, 
alternatives may actually affect far more people negatively than 1BP solvents used in 
these industrial sectors. This has not been evaluated in the pending rulemaking. 
 
 
1 
TSCA § 6(c)(2)(C),15 U.S.C. § 2605(c)(2)(C). 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
11 
 
 
Enviro Tech evaluated EPA’s alternatives assessment for 1BP. We summarize this 
information below in Table 1, with EPA’s assigned scores of “High” or “Very High” or for 
hazards that EPA concluded information was not available or had inconclusive 
information.2 
 
 
Enviro Tech notes that the human health hazards EPA identified for TDCE in its 
2023 alternatives assessment do not reflect the scope of human health hazards EPA 
identified as potential concerns in its 2020 Final Scope of the Risk Evaluation for trans-
1,2-Dichloroethylene. In that document, EPA stated that it identified the following hazard 
concerns that may be considered for the risk evaluation:3 
 
Absorption, distribution, metabolism, and elimination] ADME, cancer, 
cardiovascular, 
developmental, 
endocrine, 
gastrointestinal, 
hepatic, 
musculoskeletal, neurological, nutritional and metabolic, ocular and 
sensory, renal, reproductive, respiratory and skin and connective tissue. 
 
 
EPA proposes to establish an alternative assessment approach to prohibit existing 
chemical substances without considering costs and other non-risk factors required under 
TSCA Section 6(b)(4)(A). This is especially problematic when the alternatives identified 
by EPA have similar or greater toxicity concerns or no/inconclusive hazard information to 
ensure that employers may properly implement protective measures in the workplace. 
Again, EPA is restricting 1BP such that it will prevent continued use of this substance by 
facilitating regrettable substitutions. 
 
Table 1. EPA’s Alternatives Assessment for 1-BP. 
 
Substance (CAS RN)
EPA Identified Human Health Hazards Representative Unknown or  
Inconclusive Hazards
Ethane, 1,1,2,2-
tetrafluoro-1-(2,2,2-
trifluoroethoxy)- 
(CAS RN: 406-78-0)4 
Very High: Genotoxicity/Mutagenicity;  
High: Endocrine Disruption; 
High: Developmental Toxicity. 
 
Acute inhalation/dermal 
toxicity; 
Carcinogenicity; 
Reproductive Toxicity; 
Neurotoxicity; 
Systemic Toxicity. 
TDCE 
(CAS 
RN: 
156-60-5)5 
High: Systemic Toxicity (single 
exposure) 
Carcinogenicity; 
Endocrine Disruption; 
Reproductive Toxicity;
 
2 EPA (2023a), Appendix A Screening Results Tables of Alternative Products, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA), https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-
0063/attachment_3.pdf.  
3 EPA (2020), Final Scope of the Risk Evaluation for trans-1,2-Dichloroethane CASRN 156-60-5, EPA 
Document No.: EPA-740-R-20-007, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), at p. 40, 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-09/documents/casrn_156-60-5_trans-12-
dichloroethylene_final_scope.pdf.  
 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
12 
 
Neurotoxicity. 
Methyl 
nonafluoroisobutyl 
ether (CAS RN: 
163702-08-7)6 
 
 
Acute inhalation/dermal 
toxicity; 
Carcinogenicity; 
Endocrine Disruption; 
Reproductive/Developmenta
l Toxicity; 
Neurotoxicity; 
Systemic Toxicity. 
Methyl 
nonafluorobutyl ether 
(CAS RN: 163702-
07-6)7 
Very High: Genotoxicity/Mutagenicity. 
 
Acute inhalation/dermal 
toxicity; 
Carcinogenicity; 
Endocrine Disruption; 
Reproductive/Developmenta
l Toxicity; 
Neurotoxicity; 
Systemic Toxicity. 
Ethyl 
nonafluoroisobutyl 
ether (CAS RN: 
163702-06-5)8 
 
Acute inhalation/dermal 
toxicity; 
Carcinogenicity; 
Endocrine Disruption; 
Reproductive/Developmenta
l Toxicity; 
Neurotoxicity; 
Systemic Toxicity. 
Ethyl nonafluorobutyl 
ether (CAS RN: 
163702-05-4)9 
Very High: Genotoxicity/Mutagenicity. 
 
Acute inhalation/dermal 
toxicity; 
Carcinogenicity; 
Endocrine Disruption; 
Reproductive/Developmenta
l Toxicity; 
Neurotoxicity; 
Systemic Toxicity. 
PERC (CAS RN: 
127-18-4)10 
 
 
Very High: Carcinogenicity; 
High: Genotoxicity/Mutagenicity; 
High: Reproductive/Developmental 
Toxicity; 
High: Neurotoxicity; 
High: Systemic Toxicity. 
 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
13 
 
TCE (CAS RN: 79-
01-6)11 
Very High: Carcinogenicity; 
Very High: Genotoxicity/Mutagenicity; 
High: Reproductive/Developmental 
Toxicity; 
High: Neurotoxicity; 
High: Systemic Toxicity. 
Endocrine Disruption. 
 
 
  
 4. 
EPA (2023a), supra note _2, at p. 203. 
 5. 
Id. at p. 202. 
 6. 
Id. at p. 202. 
 7. 
Id. at p. 206. 
 8. 
Id. at p. 202. 
 9. 
Id. at p. 202. 
10. 
Id. at p. 203. 
11. 
Id. at p. 203. 
 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
In the proposed rule, EPA states its work is an effort to comply with Executive 
Order (EO) 13990 Protecting Public Health and the environment and Restoring Science 
to Tackle the Climate Crisis. As demonstrated above, the proposed rule will push the 
market to TDCE/fluorinated mixtures of comparable hazard or with limited/no hazard 
information, or substances that are actively under global regulatory restrictions. This 
includes PFAS compounds, including high global warming potentials for all. PFAS 
compounds must also be transported across the world to the U.S. (on diesel fuel burning 
ships) in order to replace a product that is not considered a global warmer and is <91% 
manufactured within the U.S.  Enviro Tech further notes that EO 13990 instructed federal 
agencies to “be guided by the best science”12 and to make decisions “following 
the science”. It is unclear why EPA has chosen to use an archaic and 
scientifically debunked method for deriving its ECEL (i.e., application of a 
linear low-dose extrapolation for cancer).  
 
This approach has been summarily rejected by leading carcinogenicity 
experts, including Dr. Bruce Ames, who stated the following about the  
incorrect assumptions and interpretations that led to this 
approach: 
  
 
A particularly relevant [method] is that the effects of the huge doses given 
to rodents were extrapolated down to low doses using a linear correlation, 
which is incorrect. Then the newly-calculated risk level was applied to the 
whole population, which resulted in an inordinate amount of concern about 
hypothetical risks with little evidence. 
 
Enviro Tech encourages EPA to revise its proposed rule as follows: 
 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
14 
 
● 
Require 1BP solvents to be used in degreasers that meet all current 
NESHAP specifications for open top vapor degreasers; 
 
● 
Require 1BP solvents users to use all current NESHAP work practices for 
open top vapor degreasers; 
 
● 
Require vapor degreaser exposure levels to be 6 ppm or less in an area 
adjacent to the vapor degreaser. As reported, this is the average exposure 
of vapor degreasers using 1BP solvents, which includes both old non-
NESHAP compliant degreasers, NESHAP complaint degreasers and an 
airless degreaser. By requiring NESHAP compliant degreasers, 6 ppm 
exposure level or less can be met in the area adjacent to the vapor 
degreaser without a gamble on a huge capital outlay. Further, emissions to 
outside air will not be increased and may possibly be reduced since a 
majority of vapor degreasers are currently operating at this level;  
 
● 
Require vapor degreaser operators to wear respirators with a factor of 50; 
 
● 
Require the use of proper gloves: Viton or Silvershield-like gloves where 
contact is reasonably foreseeable and nitrile gloves where only splash 
protection is required and 
 
● 
Modify the effective time line for implementation to at least two years to 
allow for adequate machinery to become available and for substitutes 
testing to be completed.  
 
Employing an 8-hr TWA ECEL of 6 ppm as the limit and the requirement for 
respirators with a 50 rating would bring anticipated workplace exposures for vapor 
degreaser operators to .12 ppm. This level can be met with the least amount of 
marketplace disruption, while ensuring worker protection and protecting the security of a 
U.S.-based supply chain. Doing so would allow ample time for users to evaluate their best 
course and allow time for manufacture of adequate machinery. Doing so would also 
prevent foreign entities from controlling the availability of alternative substances to 1BP  
and will ensure EPA’s compliance with legal requirement to consider costs and other non-
risk factors when regulating substances under TSCA Section 6. 
 
 
[remainder of this page is blank] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
15 
 
 
Enviro Tech appreciates the opportunity to submit these comments.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cordially, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
/s/ Richard G. Morford 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Richard G. Morford 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General Counsel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enviro Tech International, Inc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
708-343-6641 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rmorford @envirotechint.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
12. 
EPA (2023b) Draft Supplemental to the Risk Evaluation for 1,4-Dioxane, CASN 123-91-1, 
Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution, U S EPA , Document EPA_740-D-23-001 at p26, 
https//downloads.regulation.gov/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2016-0723-0103/content.pdf 
13. 
Public comments submitted to the Docket, “Preface by Dr. Bruce Ames”, 
https//downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2019-0235-0029/attachment_2.pdf 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
16 
 
 
Enviro Tech Comments on 1-BP proposed regulation (Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471) 
Attachment A 
 
From: Patrick Oliver <poliver@baronblakeslee.net>  
Sent: Tuesday, September 10, 2024 3:04 PM 
To: Rich Morford <rmorford@ensolv.com>; Scott Aulinskis saulinskis@envirotechint.com 
 
Subject: Baron Blakeslee EPA nPB Ruling Comments 
 
Hello Gentlemen, per our meeting on September 4, 2024, here are my comments about the pending EPA 
regulations on nPB, which would establish an enforceable operator exposure limit of 0.05 PPM.  The 
following information consists of my opinions and observations having worked in this industry since 1991, 
and focuses on what I believe to be my best contribution, “process and equipment".  This information is 
presented in good faith and it is incumbent upon the user to determine fitness for use. 
 
• 
OPEN TOP VAPOR DEGREASERS:  In conventional open top vapor degreasers, it is our opinion it 
will be impossible to meet the proposed nPB operator exposure limit of 0.05 PPM.    
• 
ALTERNATIVE HALOGENATED SOLVENTS: In most cases there are solvent replacements for nPB, 
specifically fluorinated solvents blended with trans-1,2-dichloroethylene.  However the cost of these 
solvents may be 2X to 3X higher per pound as compared to nPB.  In the removal of tenacious soils, such 
as chlorinated paraffin drawing compounds used in the production of tubing (used in aerospace, defense 
and medical applications), these fluorinated solvents blended with trans-1,2-dichloroethyle…do not clean 
as well as nPB.  Incomplete cleaning in these applications is detrimental to the tubing because this type 
of component is generally annealed, and any organic residue left on surfaces will contaminate the tubing.  
Organic residue on tubing left after cleaning and will also contaminate the vacuum annealing or heat 
treating furnace which can be very costly and time consuming to remediate. 
 
• 
BI-SOLVENT / CO-SOLVENT CLEANING PROCESSES:  The Bi-Solvent process involves an initial dip 
into a tank of organic solvating agent followed by rinsing and drying in that vapor degreaser, generally 
using a pure fluorocarbon rinsing agent in the second (clean) sump.  The Co-Solvent process places the 
organic solvating agent in the boil sump of a two sump vapor degreaser, followed by rinsing and drying, 
generally using a pure fluorocarbon rinsing agent in the second (clean) sump.  These processes are 
generally used for electronics cleaning applications, and are not as well suited to heavy duty cleaning 
requirements in which nPB is typically used successfully.  The pure fluorocarbon rinsing agents are 
typically the most expensive solvents on the market 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
17 
 
• 
AQUEOUS:  One possible alternative may be Aqueous Cleaning as a substitute for nPB vapor 
degreasing.  However, there are many parts which can simply not tolerate being cleaned with water or 
some types of parts, if exposed to water, will never dry fully or properly.  In the electronics cleaning 
market, modern microelectronic packaging with lower component standoff heights, and finer pitch, are 
already beyond the limits of the ability of an aqueous process.  Aqueous cleaning agents may be 
formulated with surfactants, but the required water rinse is not effective because the high surface tension 
and steric properties of water prevent the water molecules from getting into those tight spaces and rinsing 
off the aqueous cleaning agent.  Compared to solvent vapor degreasing, aqueous cleaning processes have 
a higher process cost due to the much higher energy consumption involved in heating and drying water.  
Water has a much higher specific heat than halogenated hydrocarbon solvents like nPB and the energy 
requirement is thus far higher with an aqueous process compared to vapor degreasing.  In fact, a 
comparable aqueous process may use up to ten times the amount of electrical energy as compared to a 
vapor degreasing process of equivalent capacity and scale.  Cycle times are also higher in an aqueous 
process, given the number of process steps required (wash / rinse / rinse / dry for example).  Solvent also 
evaporates completely leaving no residue, and is more effective at the removal of organic, non-polar type 
soils, where as an aqueous process has the potential to leave water spots and corrosion on part surfaces.  
The potential for contamination redeposition or cross contamination of process stages is far higher in an 
aqueous process.  With the many individual process stages required in an aqueous process (wash / rinse 
/ rinse / dry for example) the floorspace requirement for aqueous cleaning equipment is much higher, 
which also increases process costs.  Solvents used in vapor degreasing are recyclable and have no finite 
lifespan.  Aqueous cleaning agents, by comparison, react with the substrate being cleaned, the soil being 
removed, and the oxygen in the air, all of which result in a finite lifespan for aqueous cleaning agents.  
Aqueous cleaning processes also use a lot of water, and consumables, which increase process cost and 
environmental impact. 
• 
MODIFIED ALCOHOL / HYDROCARBON: Modified Alcohol / Hydrocarbon chemistries are 
flammable or combustible and operate at a very high process temperature and parts generally emerge 
from the process at a temperature well beyond what operators can touch.  The high process temperature 
of emerging parts from a Modified Alcohol / Hydrocarbon process can create potential for part corrosion 
or staining.  As parts cool, airborne moisture & particulate can accumulate on part surfaces, potentially 
causing surface appearance defects & residue deposition.  Modified Alcohol / Hydrocarbon degreasing 
processes often require the use of a corrosion inhibitor.  Because of its physical properties, Modified 
Alcohol / Hydrocarbon results in very poor distillation rates.  Distillation in typical Modified Alcohol / 
Hydrocarbon degreaser designs is not continuous because of the significant amount of energy required 
to distill the solvents.  Inevitably, when oil & grease is removed from parts, some volatile fraction of those 
hydrocarbon-type soils accumulates in the distilled Modified Alcohol / Hydrocarbon.  As a result, those 
components of contamination end up in the distilled Modified Alcohol / Hydrocarbon, where they can 
deposit on part surfaces.  For this reason, these types of cleaning processes are never used in oxygen 
service cleaning for aerospace, defense or medical applications.  Residue is ultimately a symptom of poor 
distillation and chemistry issues that compromise the purity of that distillation process.  Modified Alcohol 
/ Hydrocarbon, cannot be used to remove solder flux or paste from printed circuit boards.  The Modified 
Alcohol / Hydrocarbon chemistry can form organic acids, especially in the presence of chlorinated or sulfur 
based metalworking fluids, which can cause extensive damage to equipment & parts.  Finally, Modified 
Alcohol / Hydrocarbon requires the use of vacuum vapor degreasing systems, substantially exceeding 

Enviro Tech Comments to EPA Proposed Regulation at 89 Fed. Reg 65066 
Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
September 23, 2024 
 
18 
 
costs of conventional open top vapor degreasing systems that can use halogenated hydrocarbon solvents 
like nPB. 
 
FLAMMABLE SOLVENTS:  The type of equipment used with flammable solvents are generally 
Airless vacuum vapor degreasers, which are far above the capital cost of conventional open top vapor 
degreasing systems that can use halogenated hydrocarbon solvents like nPB.  Another additional cost in 
implementing flammable solvent  type of equipment is in the classification of the area in which the 
flammable solvent degreaser is installed.  Within a ten foot “bubble” around the perimeter of the 
equipment, no direct sources of ignition may be present and the room requires special components and 
construction methods for compliance with standards.  Fire suppression systems may also be required.  
The risk and cost associated with using flammable solvents is quite high.  Here are some comparisons 
between isopropyl alcohol (IPA) and nPB in regard to using either solvent in a typical industrial cleaning 
process:  IPA may NOT be used in conventional vapor degreasers not designed to accommodate 
flammable solvents.  An IPA system may require multiple IPA rinses to produce a completely residue free 
part.  This system may either be an Airless vacuum vapor degreaser, or in a conventional multi-stage dip 
console type cleaning system, could require an expensive drying system, which needs to be explosion 
proof, indirectly heated, exhausted, and may need nitrogen inerting or fire suppression.  IPA is flammable 
with a flashpoint of 53.1F.  All of the halogenated hydrocarbon vapor degreasing solvents generally used 
in vapor degreasers are non-flammable.  IPA is hygroscopic, drawing moisture from the air, which can 
result in water spots.  IPA has an evaporation rate of 1.5 (based on the generally accepted evaporation 
rate scale where n-butyl acetate = 1).  nPB has an evaporation rate of 4.7, so it’s considerably more 
evaporative than IPA, which translates to a faster drying process, more thorough solvent reclamation 
inside a vapor degreaser, and lower residues.  IPA waste is likely to be viewed as “hazardous” by waste 
haulers because it is “flammable”.  nPB waste is non-hazardous.  Generally it is not considered 
economically feasible to distill IPA for recycling.  On the other hand, nPB can be distilled and used 
indefinitely as long as acid acceptance is in control as specified by the solvent manufacturer.  The KB value 
of nPB is approximately 130.  It’s hard to find a consistent source for the KB value of IPA, but the highest 
I have heard is 50, but more commonly it’s in the 20s.  The higher the number, the more likely the solvent 
is to dissolve oils, greases, waxes, etc.  IPA has a relatively low soil loading capacity, compared to nPB, and 
will quickly become saturated, leading to soil redeposition, requiring more frequent disposal.  When 
properly structured and operated, there should be no residue of nPB left on part surfaces when the parts 
emerge from the degreaser.  nPB will generally produce a cleaner part, more consistently with lower 
residue than any IPA process. 
I hope this information is useful for our purposes.  If you have any questions, or would like me to 
expound on any of these points, kindly let me know.  I will assist in any way I can. 
  
Best Regards, 
Patrick Oliver 
Sales Manager: Baron Blakeslee 
Office:    304-375-6036 x420 Mobile:  502-541-9810 
http://www.baronblakeslee.net

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0138 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
1625 I Street NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20006 | 202-872-8110 | www.theHCPA.org 
September 23, 2024 
Bethany Masten 
Existing Chemicals Risk Management Division 
Ofﬁce of Pollution Prevention and Toxics 
Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW. 
Washington, DC 20460-0001 
 
Re: 1-Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act 
(TSCA) 
 
Dear Ms. Basten, 
 
On behalf of the Household & Commercial Products Association1 (HCPA) and its 
members, we want to convey our comments on 1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Regulation 
under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) (EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471). HCPA and 
its members have been involved throughout the risk evaluation of 1-BP and have a 
vested interest in ensuring that the ﬁnal regulation addresses the identiﬁed risk 
considerations but also is practical in implementation while ensuring that the risk 
management is appropriately managed and science-based.  
HCPA is unaware of existing consumer uses for 1-BP and reminds EPA that the 
SACC panel noted that many of the initially identiﬁed consumer products no longer 
appear to exist.2 We hypothesize that the limited number of consumer uses has been 
phased out since the original information was gathered. We encourage the EPA to 
update the ﬁnal rule to reﬂect the minimal consumer use better. HCPA also agrees that 
it is appropriate to prohibit consumer uses and supports the proposed prohibitions of 
consumer uses. 
HCPA shares the Agency’s concerns and uncertainty regarding the feasibility and 
cost estimates of implementing the Workplace Chemical Protection Program (WCPP).3 
 
1 HCPA is the premier trade association representing the interests of companies engaged in the 
manufacture, formulation, distribution and sale of more than $180 billion annually in the U.S. of familiar 
consumer products that help household and institutional customers create cleaner and healthier 
environments. HCPA member companies employ hundreds of thousands of people globally. HCPA 
represents products including disinfectants that kill germs in homes, hospitals and restaurants; air 
fresheners, room deodorizers, and candles that eliminate odors; pest management products for pets, 
home, lawn, and garden; cleaning products and polishes for use throughout the home and institutions; 
products used to protect and improve the performance and appearance of automobiles; aerosol products 
and a host of other products used every day. 
2 See page 34 of the SACC Report, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-
0050 
3 See Section 7.12.2 of the 1-BP Economic Analysis, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-
OPPT-2020-0471-0114 

1625 I Street NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20006 | 202-872-8110 | www.theHCPA.org 
 
 
 
 
2 
There is little doubt that the installation of equipment and controls necessary to 
implement a WCPP will be daunting for many companies, especially for small and 
medium-sized companies, and would represent a signiﬁcant business need. This is 
compounded by the ﬁnalized prohibitions to methylene chloride and proposed 
restrictions to perchloroethylene and trichloroethylene, and the absence of viable 
degreasing alternatives.4 HCPA strongly recommends that the EPA actively elicit 
targeted stakeholder feedback better to describe the cost estimates and potential WCPP-
driven prohibitions. 
HCPA is concerned that certain commercial and industrial uses are prohibited 
without an opportunity to demonstrate that the risks could be managed via a WCPP or 
other existing regulatory authorities. While the proposal notes the overlapping 
regulations, there needs to be a determination or analysis of the viability of using these 
existing and well-established authorities to address or complement the risks identiﬁed 
under TSCA authorities. HCPA recommends that the Agency perform this analysis 
before ﬁnalizing the rule. Further, HCPA recommends that the Agency provide an 
opportunity for companies to demonstrate compliance with existing authorities or 
WCPP for these uses if they can demonstrate addressing the risk. 
HCPA recommends increasing the regulatory implementation timelines by at least 
six months, as the current 3-month timeframe between stages (manufacture, processing, 
distribution, commercial use) is insufﬁcient. The additional time will better allow 
impacted industries to make the necessary supply chain changes, such as packaging 
and labeling, while allowing for the implementation of the proposal’s recordkeeping 
and downstream notiﬁcation requirements.  
HCPA strongly supports the Agency’s inclusion of a de minimis level of 1-BP and 
recommends a value consistent with OSHA’s Hazard Communication requirements of 
0.1% by weight.5 This will allow manufacturers and processors to perform appropriate 
due diligence associated with residuals of allowable uses, byproducts, or co-
manufacturing non-TSCA uses while addressing the risk considerations of 1-BP. 
Aligning these requirements would help the industry, especially downstream users, 
readily determine and ensure compliance with their obligations under TSCA while 
being consistent with the approach of de minimis thresholds with existing international 
regulations, like the European Chemicals Agency’s Article 33(1) of the REACH 
Regulation. 
HCPA recommends that the ﬁnal rule continue excluding articles from the rule as 
articles have not been shown to present an unreasonable risk. This exclusion could be 
revoked case-by-case when the EPA ﬁnds that articles signiﬁcantly contribute to 
unreasonable risk. We recommend that EPA follow an approach similar to that done 
with Signiﬁcant New Use Rules, using the standard deﬁnition of “article” for the broad 
 
4 See Section 7.12.3 of the 1-BP Economic Analysis, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-
OPPT-2020-0471-0114 
5 See the recently ﬁnalized OSHA Hazard Communication Standard, page 44380 
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2024-05-20/pdf/2024-08568.pdf  

1625 I Street NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20006 | 202-872-8110 | www.theHCPA.org 
 
 
 
 
3 
exclusion and speciﬁcally deﬁning articles in scope, where needed.6 
HCPA is concerned that the Agency has not adequately described the beneﬁts and 
costs associated with self-certiﬁcation, as described in §751.811. This includes the point-
of-sale requirements placed upon facilities and distributors and the associated 
compliance and recordkeeping burden of completing and managing the self-
certiﬁcations. While we appreciate that the scope of conditions of use is very limited, it 
is unclear what beneﬁt self-certiﬁcation would provide. The costs described in the 
Economic Analysis7 appear to underestimate the recordkeeping burden. There also 
appears to be an enforcement provision in §751.811(b)(2)(v) placed upon a distributor 
that may be difﬁcult to implement in practice. HCPA recommends revisiting this 
provision to describe the beneﬁts better and ensure the costs are appropriately 
captured. 
HCPA has concerns that the Energized Electronic Equipment Cleaner portion of 
the Alternatives Assessment that indicates Aqueous (i.e., with deionized water) or 
mechanical (e.g., carbon dioxide pellet or media blasting) methods may also be non-chemical 
alternatives to using products containing 1-BP for energized electrical equipment cleaning.8 The 
usage of an aqueous (deionized or otherwise) method would lead to an acute 
electrocution risk. It should also be noted that the referenced report, Safer Alternatives for 
the Textile Cleaning Industry: Alternative Spotting Agents and Evaluation of Improvements in 
Carbon Dioxide and Wet Cleaning Technologies,9 does not look at energized systems and 
may not be an appropriate comparison for this condition of use. HCPA strongly 
recommends the removal of this portion of the Alternatives Assessment. 
HCPA appreciates the allowance of Good Laboratory Practice Standards at 40 CFR 
part 792 or the use of a laboratory accredited by the AIHA or another industry-
recognized program, as required by proposed 751.807(b)(2)(i)(C). 
HCPA recommends that the agency incorporate well-deﬁned conditions of use into 
the ﬁnal rule. In our experience, particularly with deﬁnitions under EPA’s National 
Volatile Organic Compound Emission Standards for Consumer Products10 and the 
California Air Resources Board General Consumer Products Regulations11, having well-
deﬁned product categories has signiﬁcantly helped manufacturers and regulators 
appropriately describe and develop efﬁcacious products in the marketplace. Many 
 
6 For example, see the approach used for Elemental Mercury at § 721.10068 
7 See Table 7-56 of the 1-BP Economic Analysis 
8 See page 43 of Alternatives Assessment for Use of 1-Bromopropane, 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0063 
9 Safer Alternatives for the Textile Cleaning Industry: Alternative Spotting Agents and Evaluation of 
Improvements in Carbon Dioxide and Wet Cleaning Technologies 
https://www.irta.us/reports/BAAQMD%20Textile%20no%20appendices%202009.pdf 
10 National Volatile Organic Compound Emission Standards for Consumer Products, 
https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-40/chapter-I/subchapter-C/part-59/subpart-C/section-59.202 
11 California Air Resources Board General Consumer Products Regulations 
https://govt.westlaw.com/calregs/Document/I9CE560501C2111ED89B8BED60A034ABF?viewType=Fu
llText&originationContext=documenttoc&transitionType=CategoryPageItem&contextData=(sc.Default) 

1625 I Street NW, Suite 700, Washington, DC 20006 | 202-872-8110 | www.theHCPA.org 
 
 
 
 
4 
companies are very familiar with this approach, and this would provide a well-
managed way to ensure that companies properly formulate products and meet 
compliance requirements.12 
HCPA thanks you for considering our comments and would be happy for any 
follow-up clariﬁcations or questions. 
 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Steven Bennett, Ph.D. 
Executive Vice President, Scientiﬁc & Regulatory Affairs 
 
12 HCPA maintains a VOC matrix on behalf of members

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0152 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---


--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0131 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
Stephanie R. Feingold 
Partner 
+1.609.919.6643 
stephanie.feingold@morganlewis.com 
  
Morgan, Lewis & Bockius LLP 
502 Carnegie Center 
Princeton, NJ  08540-6241 
 +1.609.919.6600 
United States 
 +1.877.432.9652 
A Pennsylvania Limited Liability Partnership | Terry D. Johnson, Partner-in-Charge  
September 13, 2024 
Via FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL (www.Regulations.gov) 
Re: 
Docket (EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471) 
Request for Extension of Comment Period 
Proposed Regulation of 1-Bromopropane (1-BP) under the Toxic Substances Control Act 
(TSCA), 89 Fed. Reg. 65066 (August 8, 2024) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dear Ms. Masten: 
We write on behalf of an industrial client to seek a 30-day extension to the deadline to comment 
on the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) Proposed Rule entitled, 1-
Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), 89 Fed. Reg. 
65066 (August 8, 2024) (the “1-BP Rule”).  For the reasons set forth below, our client requests 
that EPA extend the comment deadline (currently September 23, 2024) to October 23, 2024. 
Our client has extensive experience in the safe and responsible use 1-BP for multiple degreasing 
applications that are essential for ensuring the integrity of highly specialized parts used in medical 
devices, nuclear power plants, and critical military defense equipment. Based on its extensive 
experience and familiarity with 1-BP, our client is well situated to provide an extensive written 
comment on the potentially significant impacts from the proposed 1-BP Rule that could ripple 
through multiple critical industries and government applications, including national security.  
The proposed 1-BP Rule is supported by over 100 documents and EPA itself has asked for input on 
45 different issues. Additional time is necessary for our client to meaningfully assess the proposed 
rule and provide meaningful and thoughtful input to EPA. If the extension is not granted, our client 
may not have enough time to compile and submit thorough comments addressing all of the 
potential economic impacts, implantation challenges, and national security significance of the 
proposal.   
Thank you for your consideration of our request.  We would greatly appreciate your prompt 
response. 
Sincerely, 
s/ Stephanie R. Feingold 
Stephanie R. Feingold 
 
cc: Bethany Masten (masten.bethany@epa.gov)

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0151 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
Stephanie R. Feingold 
Partner 
+1.609.919.6643 
stephanie.feingold@morganlewis.com 
  
Morgan, Lewis & Bockius LLP 
502 Carnegie Center 
Princeton, NJ 08540-6241 
 +1.609.919.6600 
United States 
 +1.877.432.9652 
A Pennsylvania Limited Liability Partnership | Terry D. Johnson, Partner-in-Charge  
September 23, 2024 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
Re: 
Proposed Regulation of 1-Bromopropane (1-BP) under the Toxic Substances Control Act 
(TSCA), 89 Fed. Reg. 65066 (August 8, 2024) Docket (EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471) 
Dear Ms. Masten: 
Morgan, Lewis & Bockius LLP appreciates the opportunity to provide comments on the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA or Agency) proposed regulation under the Toxic 
Substances Control Act (TSCA) for 1-Bromopropane (1-BP), also known as n-propyl bromide (nPB), 
on behalf of an industrial client.  
As a global leader in specialty metal tubing, our client has a longstanding commitment to ensuring 
the health and safety of its employees and the communities in which they live and work, and to 
protecting the environment. Our client has extensive experience in the safe and responsible use of 
1-BP in an industrial lubricant and as a vapor degreasing solvent in one of the largest open top 
vapor degreasing units in the world. In 2008, pursuant to guidance of EPA and the state 
environmental agency, our client’s facility completed a conversion from the use of trichloroethylene 
(TCE) in their industrial lubricant and as a vapor degreasing solvent to nPB. In 2016, when EPA 
announced the first 10 chemicals for regulation under the newly revised TSCA, our client began 
actively investigating available alternatives for nPB with the intent of eliminating nPB from its 
manufacturing process. Thus far, however, our client has not been able to find an alternative to 
nPB that can achieve the same functionality and cleaning capability necessary to meet the exacting 
customer-driven specifications for critical components in national defense programs, life-saving 
medical implant devices, nuclear power generation, space exploration, and commercial aerospace. 
Nearly all of the alternatives on the market today either pose health and safety and/or 
environmental concerns and are also being restricted themselves, or require significant process 
changes of varying degrees that will take time to identify, test, implement, and obtain customer 
approval for.  These comments provide important details about our client’s operations and its 
efforts to identify safe and effective substitutes, as well as the significant impacts the rule as 
currently proposed will have on our client’s operations, workforce, and customers, which our client 
urges EPA to consider as it finalizes this proposed rule.  
I. 
Executive Summary 
Our client manufactures high-precision small bore long-length metal tubing for highly critical 
applications for a range of government programs and private industries, as noted above. Over the 
past eight decades, our client’s tubes have enabled pioneering innovations that shape the future of 

 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
September 23, 2024 
Page 2 
technology. Whether it is exploring the depths of the ocean, operating within the human body, 
supporting our nation’s defense, or venturing into outer space, these small diameter metal tubes 
are engineered to ensure the performance of crucial applications. 
 
Given the nature of their end-uses, it is crucial that all contaminants be removed from the interior 
and exterior of the metal tubing at multiple stages in the production process, including the final 
pre-delivery stage. If contaminant removal is only partial, it could result in the catastrophic failure 
of critical components in the nuclear, aerospace, defense, and medical implants industries. 
Therefore, our client’s customers require that each piece of metal tubing pass microscopic 
inspection of its interior and external surfaces before the tubing leaves the facility. 
 
Based on its monitoring data, our client has determined that to meet EPA’s proposed Existing 
Chemical Exposure Limit (ECEL) of 0.05 ppm would require all workers, and occupational non-
users (ONUs) at the facility (approximately 200 individuals), to wear a continuous flow airline 
respirator in a work area that exceeds 100,000 square feet (sq. ft.). As explained in more detail 
below, given the nature of our client’s operations and the footprint of the impacted facility, these 
controls are impractical and would present significant safety risks to employees.  
  
While it believes that the proposed ECEL for 1-BP is impracticably low (particularly for 
manufacturing operations such as the ones it performs), our client is committed to taking the 
necessary steps to comply with EPA’s requirements, which, under the specific circumstances of our 
client’s facility, can only be done by eliminating the use of 1-BP in its operations. For the last eight-
plus years, our client has been researching suitable alternatives, many of which present alternative 
risks such as fire or explosion risk, while others present environmental or other concerns because 
they contain chlorinated solvents such as trans-1,2-dichloroethylene (trans DCE) and a 
fluoropolymer (PFAS) constituent or are otherwise in the process of being more heavily regulated 
by EPA (such as methylene chloride, TCE and PCE). Even where potentially suitable alternatives 
can be identified, they may not function as required to meet the exacting standards of our client’s 
customers.  For example, testing with aqueous alternatives has presented quality issues in our 
customer’s process that fail to meet customer quality standards―specifically, the exacting 
specifications dictated by the United States Department of Defense (DOD), the United States 
Department of Energy (DOE), and medical products manufacturers that ensure the integrity of 
mission-critical specialty parts. Based on our client’s experience in aggressively working to identify 
substitutes, a minimum of 60 months is needed to eliminate the use of 1-BP from its 
manufacturing processes and ensure that no person is exposed above the proposed ECEL.   
 
II. 
Discussion 
Our client solves worldwide technical and metallurgical challenges by manufacturing high 
performance tubes for super-critical applications. From aerospace to nuclear power stations, and 
renewable energy to medicine, our client’s small-diameter tubes operate in diverse industries and 
improve the safety and quality of life for millions worldwide. Without our client’s tubes, 
technological advancement in many industries would not be possible. To help EPA understand the 
criticality of nPB in our client’s process, we start with a brief overview of tube applications and the 
use of nPB in the manufacturing process.  
 

 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
September 23, 2024 
Page 3 
a. Tube Applications.  
 
Our client manufactures high-pressure tubes that perform in a range of critical defense, medical, 
aerospace and marine applications. For example, our client is a qualified supplier for both 
commercial and military aircrafts. The tubes that our client supply play a crucial role in the safe 
functioning and performance of aircraft engines. They operate within a variety of critical engine 
systems including fuel delivery, fire suppression tubes, drain lines, and bleed air systems. These 
tubes must meet stringent requirements for durability, corrosion resistance, and heat resistance to 
ensure optimal engine performance and safety. Our client also leads the manufacture of specialty 
alloy tubing for rocket engines and satellites that deliver the highest levels of performance for deep 
space exploration by delivering excellent durability that requires zero maintenance over decades of 
use.  
 
Our client is currently the sole supplier for three products supporting US defense applications, and 
the sole domestic supplier for additional US defense programs. Our client also produces nuclear 
tubes for components that are critical to the safe running of nuclear reactors. The tubes provide 
secure housing for control rods and nuclear fuel rods and enable precise control over reactor 
power output and reactivity. They are engineered to withstand the high temperatures, pressures, 
and radiation levels present in the reactor environment, and maintain the integrity of the reactor 
system. The uses of these tubes, like those for rocket engines and satellites, require that they be 
safe, effective and durable over decades of use with zero maintenance. The manufacturing process 
results in quality-assured tubing for nuclear fuel rods compliant with ASME Pressure Vessel Code 
NCA 3800 and ASME NQA-1 – audited and approved by all U.S. Commercial Nuclear customers. 
Our client’s nuclear fuel tubes help generate electricity that millions of people in the United States 
use daily.  
 
Our client also delivers medical tubes that meet the highest standards not only in strength-to-
weight ratios, but also in terms of microbiological corrosion resistance and fatigue life. These 
medical devices not only help improve people’s health, but also transform and save lives. For 
example, our client is a leading manufacturer of biocompatible tubes for Cardiac Rhythm 
Management (CRM) devices. CRM medical devices used for this treatment include pacemaker lead 
wires, defibrillators, and catheters. Tubes are crucial for the functioning of these implantable CRM 
medical devices to ensure a safe patient cardiac rhythm. Our client also manufactures implant-
grade tubing for both coronary and peripheral stents, working with customers to custom-make 
stent tubes that meet stringent quality, reliability, and performance requirements. Our client 
develops thin-wall tubing solutions that enable smaller and safer heart valves that last a lifetime.  
 
b. Critical Role of nPB in the Manufacturing Process.  
The tubing products described above are produced from more than 50 alloys, including stainless 
steels, nickel alloys, cobalt-chrome alloys, and reactive and refractory metals. Tubes are 
manufactured with outside diameters from 0.25 mm (0.010 in) up to 38.1 mm (1.5 in), in straight 
lengths over 44 feet long and coils up to 150 feet long. The tubes can be made with wall 
thicknesses from less than 0.05 mm (0.002 in) up to 3.8 mm (0.150 in). Profiles include round, 
rectangular, square, oval, or elliptical. The diameter, length, and profile needs are dictated by the 
customer’s applications, and must be produced in accordance with customer-furnished designs and 
specifications.  
 

 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
September 23, 2024 
Page 4 
Many of these alloys are problematic to cold draw due to lubrication issues and high work 
hardening rates, a situation not made easier by the very thin, uniform wall specifications. Precise 
control of wall thickness is an extremely critical aspect of our client’s manufacturing process. Tubes 
are fabricated via a series of cold-working processes.1 On average, each product requires 6 cold-
working cycles, with some requiring as many as 20 cold-working cycles. In most of these cycles, 
nPB is used as a carrier to deliver lubricant to the outer diameter (OD) and/or inner diameter (ID) 
of the tubes to protect those surfaces during the manufacturing process. This lubricant must be 
removed after each cold draw and prior to any subsequent heat-treating operation. Each cold-
working cycle also requires precision cleaning to remove any lubrication or other impurities (e.g., 
fines and debris) in a consistent and reliable fashion before the tube can go through further 
processing. After degreasing, tubes are heat-treated and prepared for the next cold-working cycle. 
The tubes are ultimately degreased using nPB multiple times during fabrication to ensure strict 
customer cleanliness and integrity specifications are met. 
 
Because of the extensive length of some of the tubes, movement through the cycles involves a 
highly choreographed operation. Many tubes are moved to the open-top degreaser through a work 
area exceeding 100,000 sq. ft. using large overhead cranes. Once inside the open-top vapor 
degreaser, tubes are moved by an automated crane system, and are dipped into the initial liquid, 
or “dirty side” of degreaser solvent sump, lifted and tilted so liquid inside the tubes drains back 
into dirty side sump. While tipping, tubes remain suspended in vapor phase for additional 
degreasing. Then tubes are transferred into clean side sump, where they are dipped into liquid 
solvent, raised into vapor phase again, and tilted, before being removed from the degreaser. 
Importantly, the basic manufacturing process and equipment is the same for all federal contract 
and commercial applications. The functions that nPB perform are critical to our client’s ability to 
meet the customer-specific specification (including DOD and DOE) as well as applicable 
engineering and regulatory standards.  
c. Exposure Points Emission Controls and PPE.  
 
Consistent with the objective of the proposed 1-BP regulation to reduce nPB exposures for workers 
and ONUs, ensuring worker safety is of the utmost importance to our client.  Our client has 
implemented a detailed Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) worker safety 
program that currently operates to reduce nPB exposures. As part of that program, our client has 
been actively working to reduce worker exposure to nPB using both engineering controls and 
personal protective equipment (PPE).  Engineering controls include the use of fume exhaust hoods, 
increased ventilation, and coolant to reduce volatilization. Required PPE includes the use of dermal 
protection (PVC or nitrile gloves) and respiratory protection (half-face air purifying respirators) 
when performing specific activities that use nPB. The use of PPE is clearly communicated to 
workers through safety training and is enforced at each workstation through signage and worker 
oversight. Respirator training is provided annually and includes employee medical fitness 
evaluations, fit testing, respirator types and selection, procedures for proper respirator use and 
care, written respiratory protection program compliant with OSHA standards, air contaminants 
overview, and exposure measurement and detection methods. In addition to the engineering 
controls and PPE, all new employees complete health and safety training that includes hazard 
 
1 “Cold-work” is actually performed at ambient room temperatures; the term is meant to 
distinguish it from “hot work” where materials are being heated. 

 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
September 23, 2024 
Page 5 
communications (how to identify presence or release, routes of exposure, protection from chemical 
hazards, and hazardous waste disposal), PPE use, life threatening programs (Energy 
Control/Lockout Tryout, cranes, forklift, confined space entry, molten metal, working at heights), 
Lockout/Tagout, emergency response procedures, ergonomics, and safe behaviors.  
 
d. This Facility Cannot Meet the Proposed Inhalation Exposure Limit of 0.05 ppm.  
 
EPA is requesting information on potential engineering, administrative, or prescriptive controls and 
how feasible it would be for entities to implement these strategies in their operations. By way of 
background, in 2008 our client converted from using TCE as its primary solvent for degreasing and 
in its lubrication process to using nPB. At the time, nPB was promoted by EPA as a safer and more 
environmentally friendly alternative to TCE for degreasing, although there was no (and there is still 
no) federal permissible exposure limit (PEL) set by OSHA or National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health (NIOSH) Recommended Exposure Limit (REL) for nPB.  In the absence of these 
values, our client has used the California OSHA PEL of 5 parts per million (ppm) as a workplace 
exposure standard. To ensure that workers and ONUs are not exposed to nPB above 5 ppm, the 
company has implemented several safety measures, as described in subsection c above, and 
conducts periodic personnel monitoring. Despite the current employee safety measures, our client 
does not achieve the proposed ECEL target of 0.05 ppm. Developing a Workplace Chemical 
Protection Program (WCPP) to meet the ECEL within the proposed 36-month compliance deadline 
for federal contractors would impose significant safety and operational challenges. 
 
Based on current nPB monitoring, to meet the ECEL within the proposed compliance timelines, our 
client would most likely need to implement the use of a NIOSH-approved supplied-air respirator 
(also referred to as airline respirator) for all workers and ONUs who are present on or near the 
manufacturing floor.2 The use of such equipment would create significant safety concerns and 
material handling challenges for maneuvering the long, thin tubes manufactured by our client, 
including tubes over 44 feet in length. Most tubes are moved throughout the manufacturing area 
using large overhead cranes, which would present serious risk of entanglement with any 
continuous flow airline respirators. Additionally, although the company does not believe that use of 
powered air purifying respirator (PAPR) systems would be effective for extended use, as would be 
required at this facility, the use of a PAPR for every worker and ONU on site can also create 
additional physical hazards from entanglement of the hoses in the site equipment and materials, as 
well as obstruction of the user’s vision by the hood. In other words, the physical layout of the 
facility and the location of degreasing and equipment cleaning activities―both of which are 
necessitated by the physical requirements of the products being manufactured―inhibits the 
practical and safe use of this additional PPE. As noted, the very nature of the product (long thin 
metal tubes) can also present an entanglement risk for the hoses associated with both types of 
respirators.  No other safety measures have been identified that could be used to reduce nPB 
concentrations to below the proposed ECEL in the interim other than entirely replacing both the 
current degreasing process and the use of nPB.  
 
2 Costs to implement a plant-wide airline respirator system that covers workers and ONUs across 
the over-100,000-square-foot plant floor are estimated to exceed $1.0 million, and the system is 
estimated to take about 8 months to install. 

 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
September 23, 2024 
Page 6 
e. Identifying Safe and Suitable Substitutes for 1-BP for Use in the Company’s 
Manufacturing Process.   
EPA requests comment on whether there are available substitutes for the use of 1-BP as a solvent 
in open-top and in-line batch vapor degreasing and the amount of time needed for vapor 
degreasers to transition to an alternative process or solvent. Our client has been actively working 
for over eight years to identify viable substitute chemicals and process changes to replace 1-BP, 
which it currently uses in both lubricant delivery and degreasing applications. To date, they have 
not found a safe and suitable alternative, although they are continuing to invest substantial 
resources to this effort and are actively working to find solutions. 
As early as 2014, our client began to evaluate aqueous cleaning as a potential degreasing option to 
replace nPB. In 2016, when nPB was designated as a high-priority chemical under TSCA and EPA 
initiated the risk evaluation process, our client began evaluating other alternatives to reduce or 
eliminate 1-BP from its manufacturing process.  These alternatives included additional chemical 
substitutions (various trans DCE formulations, Solveco hydrocarbon, modified alcohols) and 
additional equipment changes (closed-loop vacuum degreasing, aqueous cleaning). In total, at 
least seven chemical/equipment options were considered and evaluated in detail between 2016 
and 2022. Since 2022, when the risk evaluation of 1-BP was finalized by EPA, our client has 
engaged in an even more aggressive evaluation of alternatives focusing on replacing 1-BP in 
current degreasing equipment (chemical modifications) and changing current equipment to a 
closed loop system (equipment modifications). In total, this most recent evaluation has included at 
least six chemical modifications, five equipment modifications, and four lubricant modifications.  
In addition to the alternatives for degreasing applications, our client is evaluating lubricating 
alternatives for that essential part of the manufacturing process. Currently, nPB is used in the 
vapor degreaser to remove lubricants from the metal tubes (as described in Section II.b above), 
and changes to the lubricant could also impact the efficacy and suitability of a degreasing 
substitute. To date, none of the degreasing alternatives to 1-BP have been able to produce the 
same quality product that meets the exacting specifications of our client’s customers for any of the 
lubricants tested. In addition, several of the alternatives considered for vapor degreasing 
presented other safety concerns and new toxicity risks (e.g., PFAS and trans DCE) and 
fire/explosion risks (e.g., acetone), which has excluded those chemicals as viable substitutes. 
Others potential substitutes are also in the process of being evaluated (and possibly restricted) by 
EPA (including methylene chloride, PCE, and TCE). Our client does not want to make a “regrettable 
substitution” by switching to a chemical that may be found to be highly dangerous or toxic and 
therefore is focused on carrying out extensive vetting and testing before making any changes to 
the existing process.  
It also must be noted that any testing currently being completed by our client is done using small 
six inches pieces of metal tubing or flat, roughly 4”x4” square metal pieces composed of stock 
samples of similar metal alloys referred to as “coupons”. Equipment and chemical testing of very 
small metal pieces may not be an accurate substitute for the testing of tubes over 44 feet in length 
that are currently being produced. As a result, any testing of alternatives must go through multiple 
rounds of quality assurance review, including testing with different metal alloys to ensure that the 
final equipment/chemical selected can meet production specifications and successfully be scaled 
up. Compounding the challenges are the fact that 1-BP is currently used as both a lubricant and in 
a degreasing solvent in different parts of the manufacturing process, as noted above. Accordingly, 
compatible substitutes that are both safe and effective for both processes will need to be 

 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
September 23, 2024 
Page 7 
identified, tested, and approved.  And even once substitutes are successfully identified, our client 
must consider the specifications required for all final products, including those produced for DOD 
and DOE, as well as its commercial customers. Process changes require customer approval 
(including from DOD and DOE) that could span up to 18 months after trials are completed. 
Further illustrating the complexity of identifying a safe and reliable substitute for 1-BP, the 
company has determined this will require a significant equipment change, specifically, the purchase 
a new large-scale vacuum degreaser for use with the substitute chemicals (likely either modified 
alcohols or hydrocarbons, or a modified alcohol-hydrocarbon blend), at a cost in excess of $11 
million. Because both the chemicals and degreasing equipment will be entirely new with regard to 
the company’s processes, and because it is imperative the process performs as expected, the 
company will first need to purchase a smaller, less-expensive degreasing unit to simulate scalable 
aspects of the vacuum degreasing operation. This up-front investment will facilitate the company’s 
implementation of its testing plan to compare the efficacy of various solvent formula, confirm 
compatibility of the solvents with the different lubricants and alloys employed, determine if 
adjustments to lubrication strategy are required, understand long-term solvent stability, lifecycle 
and effects on equipment, prove cleaning and solvent drying effectiveness with various part 
geometries, and (ideally) develop scalable processes. The company has estimated that the smaller 
degreaser will require eight months to acquire and install, and that this complete process will take 
at least 24 months to complete. 
 
Please see Exhibit A to these comments for a chart summarizing many of the recent efforts and 
challenges faced by the company in finding a safe and reliable substitute for 1-BP.  
 
f. 
The Company is Trying to Avoid Making a Regrettable Substitution. 
In light of its prior experience switching from TCE to 1-BP, the company is concerned about 
selecting a substitute that may itself need to be replaced in a few years, particularly given the 
extensive R&D, time and cost that will be required for the 1-BP replacement. Unfortunately, that 
eliminates many possible alternatives. 
As EPA acknowledges in its Economic Analysis of the Proposed Regulation of 1-Bromopropane 
Under TSCA Section 6(a) (“Economic Analysis”), EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0114_content, “Three 
solvents sometimes used for vapor degreasing are also included in the first 10 TSCA work plan 
chemicals: methylene chloride, TCE, and PCE. The risk evaluations for these three chemicals all 
found an unreasonable risk under TSCA for their use in vapor degreasing. Given the regulatory 
uncertainty while EPA considers risk management options for these chemicals, this analysis 
assumes that these chemicals would not be adopted as alternative vapor degreasing solvents for 
1-BP.” Economic Analysis, §5.3. These solvents are indeed among those proposed to our client as 
substitutes and rejected for precisely these reasons. 
Perhaps the most commonly proposed ingredient in substitutes offered to our client is trans DCE); 
that, too, presents challenges, including its own health risks, as well as possible insurance, 
environmental and supply chain issues (since it is often combined with fluorinated chemicals). As 
EPA notes in its Economic Analysis, “In addition, one alternative to the use of 1-BP in vapor 
degreasing are nonflammable mixes of trans-1,2-dichloroethylene (trans DCE) and fluorinated 
chemicals; the availability of these chemical mixes could be impacted by 3M’s decision to cease 
manufacturing per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), including Nederlandse Opstelpunten 
voor Ethercommunicatie (NOVEC) products (mixes of trans DCE and PFAS) at the end of 2025. The 

 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
September 23, 2024 
Page 8 
fluorinated inerting agents are also under scrutiny by the U.S. EPA and other regulators because of 
concerns about PFAS.” Economic Analysis, §5.3. 
In short, each of the different chemicals and substances being considered come with potential risks 
of their own, which must be carefully evaluated and appropriate health and safety solutions 
identified before they can be considered for implementation.  This requires more time than the 
proposed rule provides for, as further discussed below. 
III. 
The 36-Month Compliance Deadline Is Infeasible For this Facility.  
EPA requests comment on any advantages or drawbacks for the timelines outlined in the proposed 
and alternative regulatory actions. Based on the alternatives already considered (and the many 
already rejected), our client currently estimates that it will need at least 60 months (five years) 
from the time the rule is finalized to meet the 1-BP ECEL requirements.  
TSCA Section 6(d)(1)(E) requires that any final risk management rule must provide a reasonable 
transition period. TSCA Section 6(c)(2) requires that EPA consider the economic consequences of 
the rule, including the likely effect of the proposed rule on the national economy and technological 
innovation. The final rule must allow adequate time for our client to transition to away from nPB so 
that it can mitigate impacts to the national supply chain―as well as avoid any detrimental national 
security impacts―for its highly specialized components. By way of example the facility’s previous 
transition from TCE to nPB was a straightforward process that required limited process changes, 
and even that comparatively simple transition took approximately 2.5 years, or 30 months.  Any 
transition necessitated by EPA’s final rule, which will require more complicated and extensive 
process changes, will be much more complex and time-consuming, as illustrated by the efforts our 
client has taken to date to find a suitable replacement for nPB (described in Section II.e and 
Exhibit A). 
EPA’s proposed timeline also fails to leave sufficient time for new approvals of regulatory controls.  
For example, our client’s facility is a Title V facility. Assuming our client will have to eliminate nPB 
and upgrade its degreaser, under the Clean Air Act a New Source Review (NSR) would be required 
by both the EPA and state environmental agencies. The NSR process could take 12-18 months 
before our client could even purchase a new degreaser. Actual construction and replacement 
cannot begin until after a suitable 1-BP substitute is determined and customer specifications are 
approved. Lead times for an approved degreaser (which would need to be custom built) is 
estimated to be 12-18 months. Site preparation and building/infrastructure modifications to 
accommodate a new degreaser and solvent should be expected to take 12 months or more to 
complete. If, as expected, our client is required to deploy upgraded engineering controls, we 
estimate that it could take 18 months or more to validate process changes that are necessary to 
ensure the quality and integrity of products especially for United States military defense 
applications. EPA’s proposed compliance dates are thus grossly underestimated.  
a. If the Rule is Finalized as Proposed, The Company Will Require an Exemption from the 
Proposed Compliance Deadlines Pursuant to TSCA Section 6(g). 
 
EPA has requested public comment regarding the need for exemptions from the proposed 
requirements pursuant to the provisions of TSCA Section 6(g). In light of the exacting customer-
driven specifications necessary for the components that our client manufactures at its facility, 
which are critical in applications such as national defense programs and nuclear power generation, 
an exemption under Section 6(g) is not only warranted but necessary in order to ensure production 

 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
September 23, 2024 
Page 9 
continuity should EPA choose to finalize either the 36-month timeline for federal contractors or 
prohibit the use of 1-BP as a solvent in open-top and in-line batch vapor degreasing. 
 
TSCA Section 6(d) provides that any TSCA Section 6(a) rule must specify mandatory compliance 
dates, which shall be as soon as practicable with a reasonable transition period “but not later than 
5 years after the date of promulgation of the rule, except in a case of a use exempted under 
subsection (g).” 15 U.S.C. § 2605(d)(1)(B). Under Section 6(g) of TSCA, EPA is authorized to grant 
an exemption from a risk management rule if the Administrator makes one of three separate 
findings: 
 
(A) the specific condition of use is a critical or essential use for which no 
technically and economically feasible safer alternative is available, taking into 
consideration hazard and exposure; 
(B) compliance with the requirement, as applied with respect to the specific 
condition of use, would significantly disrupt the national economy, national 
security, or critical infrastructure; or 
(C) the specific condition of use of the chemical substance or mixture, as 
compared to reasonably available alternatives, provides a substantial benefit to 
health, the environment, or public safety. 
 
15 U.S.C. § 2605(g)(1). Section 6(g) exemptions require the Administrator to “analyze the need for 
the exemption”; to establish a specific time period for the exemption; and to promulgate 
reasonable conditions “to the extent that the Administrator determines the conditions are 
necessary to protect health and the environment while achieving the purposes of the exemption.” 
15 U.S.C. §§ 2605(g)(2)-(4). Critically, Section 6(g) exemptions allow EPA to recognize that in 
certain circumstances, the importance of the need to use a specific substance outweighs 
associated risks, even when those risks might not be appropriate in other applications.  
 
i. 
The Use of 1-BP is Critical and Essential For the Manufacturing Supercritical  
Components For Which No Technically and Economically Feasible Safer 
Alternative. 
 
As detailed above, the precision specialty tubes manufactured by our client are subject to exacting 
size and cleanliness requirements, and nPB is a key component of our client’s ability to meet both 
of those requirements. Currently, nPB is used to aid in the cold work process and as a degreasing 
solvent to remove all impurities on the tubes prior to heat treating and drawing. The facility 
operates one of the largest open-top and batch vapor degreasing units in the world, which is 
necessary to degrease tubes lengths over 44 feet long. At present, and despite multiple years of 
efforts to identify suitable substitutes, nPB is currently the only safe and effective method for 
working and degreasing tubes used during the manufacturing process to the precise specifications 
demanded by the company’s customers and products market, and is incorporated into all approved 
protocols for manufacturing defense-related components. 
 
ii. 
If Finalized, the Proposed Compliance Deadline of 36 Months Would 
Significantly Disrupt the National Economy, National Security, and Critical 
Infrastructure.  
 
The proposed rule (and proposed regulatory alternatives) would require our client to adhere to a 
three-year compliance deadline for eliminating nPB from its manufacturing process. As detailed 

 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
September 23, 2024 
Page 10 
above, our client’s monitoring results indicate that it would have to reduce worker and ONU 
exposed by two orders of magnitude to meet EPA’s proposed ECEL of 0.05 ppm. To achieve the 
ECEL relying on the facilities’ existing technology and controls, all workers and ONUs at the facility 
(approximately 200) would need to wear a continuous flow airline respirator in a work area that 
exceeds 100,000 square feet. While those measures would reduce the inhalation exposures, they 
would subject workers to significant physical risks. The company’s manufacturing operations 
require employees to be able to move freely about the facility and requires the use of cranes to 
move the large, thin tubes. Installation of a continuous flow airline respirator (which the company 
has identified as the form of PPE most likely to be able to achieve the ECEL) in that environment 
would increase the risk of tripping, choking, and other physical hazards during facility operations 
and hamper the free flow of movement by virtue of being tethered to the air flow source. 
Therefore, meeting the proposed ECEL would not only expose workers and ONUs to an increased 
level of physical risk due to the facility-specific processes, but also reduce the facility’s production 
capacity and hinder our client’s ability to satisfy commercial and government defense contracts for 
the most demanding supercritical applications.  
 
In the meantime, critical government orders will not be able to be fulfilled, jeopardizing our 
nation’s defense and nuclear energy programs (since those orders are typically placed years in 
advance). By way of example, the company has product orders under federal contracts for the US 
Department of Energy for which production will extend into 2026, assuming use of all current 
production capacity. Interruption of delivery on these orders is simply not an option.   
 
iii. 
Our Client’s Tubes Provide a Substantial Benefit to Health and Public safety. 
 
The company’s manufacturing process has led to groundbreaking new technologies and amazing 
new products that meet the toughest specifications for the most challenging applications. As noted 
previously, this facility is the sole supplier for three critical products supporting U.S. government 
defense programs run by the U.S. Department of Defense and U.S. Department of Energy and is 
the sole domestic supplier for components necessary to continued operation of an additional 
defense program. These products are necessary for successful continuation of these programs, 
with orders placed for these materials years in advance to ensure continuity in supply. 
 
Our client appreciates EPA’s acknowledgement of the procurement requirements that federal 
contractors must follow, see 89 Fed. Reg. at 65089, but would like to emphasize that the three-
year proposed timeline does not adequately provide for both the time required by the procurement 
process and the time required to implement process changes once approved. Importantly, the 
process of receiving approval from the U.S. defense programs that utilize the critical components 
manufactured at our client’s facility cannot begin until after the company has successfully identified 
an acceptable substitute, and the process of implementing any changes cannot occur until a 
proposed change has been approved. Once an alternative has been identified, customer approval 
involves a number of steps and could take more than 18 months. This process first requires the 
company to submit a process qualification plan to the customer for review and approval. After the 
qualification plan is approved, it typically takes the company 6 months to execute the qualification 
plan. The results are documented in a report that is submitted to the customer for further review 
and approval, which typically takes an additional 3 to 6 months before final approval is granted. 
Once approved, our client would then have to actually implement the transition. A recent example 
for a relatively simple process qualification for a critical defense-related product required more 
than five years. Based on the current status of the research efforts described above in Section II.e 

 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
September 23, 2024 
Page 11 
and the procurement estimates and timelines obtained to date, our client estimates that the very 
earliest this transition could be completed is five years from publication of a final rule.   
 
In light of the progress made in research efforts to date, our client anticipates that a viable 
alternative is within reach but will require more time than is allowed under the proposed rule. 
Therefore, EPA should revise the proposed rule to incorporate a time-limited exemption under 
TSCA Section 6(g) of a five-year compliance deadline to enable the conversion of open-top vapor 
degreasers with a new technology that will satisfy the objective of the proposed rule while 
mitigating impacts to the national supply chain, as required by TSCA Section 6(d). 
IV. 
Prescriptive Engineering or Administrative Controls Are Not Appropriate or Feasible.  
EPA is soliciting comment on prescribing specific engineering or administrative controls that would 
reduce inhalation exposures enough to address the unreasonable risk across all industrial uses of 
1-BP in open-top and in-line batch vapor degreasing. The company strongly discourages the 
proposed primary regulatory alternative of adopting prescriptive controls. While the use of 
performance-based measures would provide some level of flexibility in the manufacturing process 
to account for continued innovation, individual facility footprints, and individual process needs that 
may vary from facility to facility, a prescriptive control intended to apply broadly across uses could 
render certain facilities, such as our client’s facility, unable to continue their operations due to 
restrictions that cannot be reconciled with process and/or client requirements.   
In contrast, the use of performance-based measures allowing regulated entities to select measures 
applicable and appropriate for their individual facilities would allow for continued innovation, 
individual facility footprints, and individual processes needs that likely vary from industry to 
industry. 
 
V. 
Other 
a. Federal Contractor Compliance Schedule Should Apply to All Commercial Applications 
at the Same Facility.  
All of the company’s products are manufactured on the same assembly lines and go through the 
same degreaser unit utilizing 1-BP regardless of the end customer. Accordingly, it is simply not 
feasible to have separate timelines for federal and non-federal customers. As a practical matter, 
switching to new chemicals will result in a process change and procuring new equipment. It is not 
viable to make these changes before the customer―and more specifically, the federal government/ 
military customers―have approved all of the changes. Otherwise, the company could invest 
millions of dollars in new, custom-built equipment for a process that ultimately is rejected and 
cannot be used, resulting in further delays and unnecessary expense. While the proposed rule does 
not currently address such joint operations, language should be included in the final rule to make it 
clear that where the same operations and equipment are used for projects subject to government 
contracts as are used for other uses, the longer federal timeline should govern.  
 
b. Potential Costs Associated With Compliance. 
EPA seeks to obtain more information on potential costs that could be incurred. EPA estimates 
$14.8-$15.5 million annualized over 20 years (depending on discount rate) for all users. While we 
recognize that these are central estimates, we believe EPA has nevertheless greatly 
underestimated the costs of implementing this proposed rule. For this one industrial company 
alone, it will cost at least that much just to upgrade the equipment and processes – and that 

 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
September 23, 2024 
Page 12 
doesn’t include the years of employee time and associated expense to investigate alternative 
products and equipment, or increased operations and maintenance costs for the new equipment. 
Our client expects a plant-wide airline respirator system alone would exceed $1.0M to install 
(assuming installation and use of such a system were even compatible with the nature of this 
plant’s operations). In addition, routine operation and maintenance (O&M) is estimated to be 
$50,000 per year, and routine exposure monitoring to be $25,000 per year. The company 
estimates costs of over $11 million for a new closed-loop vapor degreaser (including engineering 
and construction management, site modifications, shipping, labor, fire protection, decommissioning 
and removal of the current unit, and of course the machine itself). The company also estimates an 
additional $3 million investment for fugitive emissions controls, which assumes a scenario where 
the company operates the current degreaser in parallel with a new closed-loop vapor degreaser. 
Controls would potentially include (but are not limited to) hoods, a carbon system, exhaust in and 
around the degreaser, and a temperature-controlled air system. 
c. Ambient Air Monitoring. 
Beyond discussion regarding the ECEL for workers and ONUs within the facility, EPA is requesting 
comment on the need for and associated costs of ambient air monitoring at fenceline locations, 
including fenceline monitoring, or facility emissions source monitoring, as well as information on 
the frequency and nature of air monitoring EPA should consider including as requirements in the 
final rule (such as a detection limit for 1–BP). EPA is also requesting comment on methods to 
inform fenceline communities of any increases of 1–BP emissions to ambient air.  
Our client agrees that understanding potential fenceline exposures is important but would like to 
emphasize that collection of such data under this proposal is unnecessary given current regulatory 
requirements. Our client’s facility operates under a Title V Operating Permit (TVOP) issued by the 
state environmental agency which incorporates a plant-wide applicability limit (PAL) for volatile 
organic compounds (VOC), including nPB. The TVOP conditions, including the PAL, are specifically 
designed to confirm that any facility emissions – including emissions of nPB – are within the limits 
set pursuant to state and federal regulations (such as federal National Emission Standards for 
Hazardous Air Pollutants, or pursuant to source-specific Reasonably Available Control Technology 
requirements). To demonstrate compliance with its PAL and other TVOP conditions, the facility is 
required to monitor facility emissions and must meet work practice requirements such as using 
specific fuels or conducting equipment tune-ups at specific intervals. In addition, as a condition of 
the facility permit, a modeling evaluation was completed to further demonstrate off-site impacts 
are within acceptable levels, including observable ambient air concentrations of nPB that are below 
the proposed ECEL. All Title V permits are renewed every five years, requiring that facilities re-
evaluate emissions and identify any process changes between permit applications.  
 
The existing permits and existing air quality requirements that our client maintains are considered 
sufficient to protect fenceline communities. Our client actively works with Federal and state 
agencies that develop permit limits that are protective of public health.  In reality, most facilities, 
operate at levels well below limits established in permits. However, even at the permit limits 
established for this facility, the ambient levels at the fenceline have been shown to be below levels 
that could be of concern to the community, based on guidelines established by the regulatory 
agencies and recent state ambient air monitoring. Given available data and the established permit 
conditions which the facility must comply with, it is inadvisable to conduct additional fenceline 
monitoring that could be reported to the public and easily misunderstood.   
 

 
FEDERAL eRULEMAKING PORTAL 
September 23, 2024 
Page 13 
d. Determinations for Re-monitoring 
It is not necessary to have Environmental Professional or Certified Industrial Hygienist make the 
determination if re-monitoring is required. Retesting should be determined by designated 
personnel responsible for the implementation of the 1-BP WCPP.  
Thank you for your consideration of these comments.  Should you wish to discuss to discuss any of 
these comments or the information presented therein in greater detail, please contact me at 
stephanie.feingold@morganlewis.com, (609) 919-6643. 
Sincerely, 
s/ Stephanie R. Feingold 
Stephanie R. Feingold 
 
 
 
cc: Bethany Masten (masten.bethany@epa.gov) 
     Joel Wolf (wolf.joel@epa.gov) 
     Sheila Canavan (canavan.sheila@epa.gov)  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT A 
 
 

Modification considered
Modification description
Chemical substitutes considered
Safety (exposure reduction) actions 
Challenges/reason for failure
Time spent testing/considering
1 Chemical modification
Drop-in nPB direct replacement in existing open 
top degreaser
nPB direct replacement containing some form 
of trans DCE and PFAS. Substitutes 
considered include: ProSolv5408e, NuGenTec 
FluoSolv CX, Honeywell Solstice PF, DuPont 
Vertrel Sion, 3M Novec 73DE Engineered 
Fluid.
Direct replacement for nPB formulas 
contain fluorinated compounds which is a 
concern for the facility.
1. Viable alternatives identified have all contained some form of trans DCE. 
Chlorinated compounds may not be used at site due to environmental liability 
insurance exclusions.  Trans DCE was also designated by EPA as a high priority 
chemical under TSCA in 2019, and is also undergoing risk evaluation by EPA. 
Further regulation under TSCA anticipated.
2. New-generation halogenated solvents are prohibitively expensive at usage levels 
of current degreaser.
Approach considered but not tested due to 
formulas containing chlorinated 
compounds.
2 Chemical modification
Hydrocarbons in existing open top degreaser
Solveco brand Tetraethylene glycol dimethyl 
ether (hydrocarbon)
Refer to SDS for Solveco. Significant 
exposure controls needed for use. 
1. Tested samples failed to meet cleanliness standards or post-degrease annealing 
requirements. Results indicated residual contamination produced fine grain layer 
on nickel-based alloy.
2. Solveco requires vacuum distillation due to high boiling point and would be 
unreasonably difficult to dry in an open  top greaser.
Approach tested in 2016 by affiliated 
company and was unsuccessful in meeting 
cleanliness standards.
3 Chemical modification
Modified alcohol (MA) in existing degreaser
Modified alcohol
Fire hazard concerns
1. Modified Alcohol in an open top degreaser presents a fire risk due to the lower 
flashpoint (142°F).  Surrounding electrical equipment would need to upgraded to 
meet hazloc requirements.
2. Fire hazard categorized similar to nPB, TCE, Kerosene.  
3. Modified alcohol is impossible to distill in an open top system and would be 
unreasonably difficult to dry. Auxiliary vacuum equipment would be required to 
distill and keep solvent clean and usable.
Approach considered but not tested. MA is 
not safe or practical to use in an open top 
degreaser.
4 Chemical modification
Testing modified alcohols as solvents; third party 
performing tests on Dowclene MA
Dowclene 1601 (Modified alcohol)
KYZEN 6386 (Modified alcohol)
Dowclene 1621 (MA/HC blend)
1. Tested samples resulted in unidentified residue remaining.
2. Both effective on process lubes excluding Primary Lubricant (Primary Lubricant).
3. KYZEN 6386 failed test against Primary Lubricant using max temperatures (60 
degC).
4. Supplier 5 recommended against using MA, as may leave film on parts due to low 
distillation rates.
Tested Dowclene MA using Supplier 1's 
machine in 2018 and 2019. Tests using 
Dowclene 1601 MA were ongoing in 2022.
5 Chemical modification
Considering acetone as solvent as suggested by 
Supplier 5. Acetone handles polar/nonpolar soils.
Acetone
Less harmful VOC for the environment, but 
significant fire hazard
1. Primary Lubricant or RA 265 are not soluble in acetone at room temperature.
2. Fire hazard categorized similar to gasoline, IPA.
Approach considered but not tested due to 
fire hazard concerns.
6 Chemical modification
Elimination of use of Primary Lubricant in process
Primary Lubricant alternative (heavier 
lubricants with high pressure additives).
Eliminates exposure to individuals 
performing manual application by ID 
spraying or OD coating, but may allow 
more satisfactory results when using 
alternative cleaning agents .
1. Challenging to find effective degreaser to remove Primary Lubricant.
2. Significant length of time involved in testing.
3. Elimination of Primary Lubricant results in tube quality issues such as 
scratching.
4. Initial test producing short nickel-based alloy product without Primary Lubricant 
was successful in certain applications.  Successful integration will require addition 
of a new step/operation in the processing chain to substitute for Primary Lubricant 
application.
Elimination team formed in July 2022. Tests 
planned for August 2022 but started tests in 
May 2023 due to availability of trial TREX. 
Testing is ongoing and is being tracked with 
Primary Lubricant elimination heat map. 
Initial results were successful in producing 
short nickel-based alloy product without 
Primary Lubricant in a small number of 
applications.  Customer 
validation/qualification still required before 
work on developing the substitute can 
continue.
7 Equipment modification
New vacuum degreasing system to replace open 
top degreaser. Equipment manufacturer options 
considered include Suppliers 1-7.
Supplier 1 system utilizes Metalnox 6386 (or 
similar modified alcohol as a cleaning agent)
Vacuum system results in significantly 
reduced emissions compared to open top 
degreaser
1. Solvent capability to remove existing lubes and elimination of precoat.
2. Robust process to clean and dry the smallest ID tubes using modified alcohol.
3. Supplier 4 eliminated from consideration due to weakness of top load design 
(03/2023).
4. Supplier 5 eliminated from consideration due to safety concerns (05/2023).
5.  Supplier 6 did not performed coupon trials as timely as expected.
Lead time for equipment would be around 
12 months. Tube cleaning tests by Supplier 
1 performed using vacuum degreaser in 
2018 and 2019. Tests by Supplier 6 are still 
in process as of September 2024.
8 Equipment modification
Aqueous cleaning process utilizing series of water-
based solutions to replace open top degreaser and 
solvents
Aqueous solution
1. Energy intensive process due to large amount of energy required to heat water, 
compared to solvents, and energy required to dry the tubes.
2. Aqueous process requires extensive space for dip tanks and water treatment 
system.
3. Impractical to implement aqueous system at scale required at current facility.
Onsite test conducted in May 2014 on 
stainless steel only, and results were 
primarily unsuccessful in meeting 
cleanliness standard. Aqueous process is 
impractical to test and/or implement at 
scale required.
Exhibit A - Summary of technologies considered to reduce or eliminate 1-BP

Modification considered
Modification description
Chemical substitutes considered
Safety (exposure reduction) actions 
Challenges/reason for failure
Time spent testing/considering
Exhibit A - Summary of technologies considered to reduce or eliminate 1-BP
9 Equipment modification
Bolt-on technology applied to existing degreaser; 
thermal oxidizer/incinerator with aqueous 
scrubber deemed only technically feasible option 
due to relatively low VOC conc. in exhaust stream 
of degreaser.
1. High operational costs of thermal oxidizer/aqueous scrubber deemed 
economically non-feasible.
2. Bolt-on technology will not eliminate the volume of solvent usage, and permit 
prohibition will still be present.
Approach considered, but impractical to 
test at scale.
10 Equipment modification
Closed-loop acetone unit manufactured by 
Supplier 5
Acetone
1. Fire hazard concerns
Approach considered but not tested due to 
fire hazard concerns.
11 Equipment modification
Small scale vacuum degreaser for solvent testing 
and process development. Initially considered 
renting unit from Supplier 7, but currently 
considering purchasing unit from Supplier 6.
Modified alcohol
1. Initial rental machine became unavailable; strategy has since shifted towards 
purchasing a small scale degreaser to test and prove MA/HC solvents 
effectiveness.
Started discussion of renting machine in July 
2022. Proposed purchasing machine in 
August 2024. Degreaser would be available 
in early 2025.
12 Equipment modification
Open-top degreaser available from other company 
site to use for solvent testing and process 
development.
Modified alcohol
1. Used degreaser was not set up for flammable solvents but considered 
modifications.
2. Approach ultimately scrapped due to machine being impractical and unsafe for 
use with MA.
Started discussion in March 2023. Approach 
considered but not tested. MA is not safe or 
practical to use in an open top degreaser.
13 Lubrication modification
Testing alternative lubricants
ETNA lubricants (ETNA 8649, considered a 
formulation with Molybdenum)
1. Limited success with coupon tests and drawing as-welded stainless.
2. Molybdenum lubricants have a component that is insoluble in nPB. Further 
testing would be required to determine solubility in MA and how lubricant would 
function in vacuum degreaser.
3. No major concerns, but it is not expected to have greater ease of cleaning or 
better performance compared to current lubricants. Utility of this analysis may be 
limited, as this is not a lubricant that is currently used, or a drop-in replacement for 
the primary lubricant.
Tests performed in April 2022. Initial coupon 
test results took ~1 month. 
14 Lubrication modification
Testing alternative lubricants
Eight new lubricants tested in MA (including 
RA 265, ETNA B7309, B7309LV, RA LW-10 ID 
& OD)
1. Modified alcohols are polar solvents and most lubricants are oils and greases 
which are non-polar
2. All performed reasonably well on coupons except for RA 265 lubricant (Primary 
Lubricant substitute candidate)
Tests performed in May 2022. Initial coupon 
test results took ~1 month.
15 Lubrication modification
Testing alternative lubricants: First RA 265, then 
RA 264 or 296-S
Richards Apex (RA) 265, RA 264 and RA 296-S
1. RA 265 left residue
2. Some success with RA 264 drawing trial - OD was perfect but ID scratched. May 
be attributed to failure to deliver sufficient amount of lube to ID on plug draw.
Started tests in May 2022. Since then, a 
larger Primary Lubricant elimination effort 
began.
16 Lubrication modification
Testing alternative lubricants: 226, 227, RESCO 
draw, lard oil-all current company lubricants
226, 227, RESCO draw, lard oil-all current 
company lubricants
1. Test results showed ability to be removed from coupons, but have not been 
tested on full scale tubes.
2. Logistics challenges to finding way to test full scale tubes. In communication 
with vendor about testing full scale tubes in one of their customers' machines, but 
the two domestic customers will not agree. Vendor is looking into option in 
European country.  Company faces challenges in moving forward with full-scale 
testing due to the absence of any available systems of suitable size, and due to 
concerns by customers about contamination of their systems or other unintended 
consequences.
Tests performed in July 2022. Initial coupon 
tests took ~1 month. Larger scale testing (4 
feet) are being planned. Options for full 
scale testing are being investigated.
Notes
MA = Modified Alcohol
HC= Hydrocarbons
OD = Outer Diameter
ID = Inner Diameter
Coupon = roughly 4”x4” flat metal piece used for testing purposes  
nPB = n-Propyl Bromide or 1-Bromopropane
trans DCE = trans-1,2-dichloroethylene
PFAS = per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances  
VOC = Volatile Organic Compound
Certain trade/company names have been genericized for NDA/trade secret reasons.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0128 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
September 9, 2024 
 
Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
 
Comments to the EPA on the Proposed Rule for 1-Bromopropane 
Agency/Docket Numbers: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471; FRL-8156-01-OCSPP 
RIN: 2070-AK73 
 
Dear Administrator Regan, 
I am a practicing Industrial Hygienist who evaluates workplace exposures to chemical and physical 
hazards. I appreciate the opportunity to provide feedback on the United States Environmental Protection 
Agency’s (EPA) proposed rule on 1-Bromopropane (1-BP). 
 
1. EPA is requesting public comment on all elements of the proposed regulatory action and the 
alternative regulatory actions. 
In regard to the requirement to “…re-monitor within 15 working days after receipt of results of any 
exposure monitoring when results indicate non-detect or air monitoring equipment malfunction, unless an 
Environmental Professional as defined at 40 CFR 312.10 or a Certified Industrial Hygienist reviews the 
monitoring results and determines re-monitoring is not necessary,” the EPA must clarify in the final 
regulation the definition of a “non-detect” result. 
 
Often, Industrial Hygienists receive sampling results that indicate a result is “less than the limit of 
detection” (LOD) of the sampling method (for example, a laboratory result of <0.1 ppm). Typically, this 
type of result is indicative of a well-controlled exposure (i.e., a result which is below the ECEL Action 
Level) which does not need to be re-monitored within 15 working days. 
 
Therefore, if the EPA is going to define “less than the limit of detection” (LOD) as a “non-detect” result, 
this does not make technical sense. 
 
If, however, a non-detect result is due to sampling issues like not enough air volume collection, then re-
monitoring should be required.  
 
A clarification in definition is needed to ensure excessive personal monitoring is not pursued for 
processes that are well-controlled. 
 
Additionally, the proposed requirement to re-monitor within 15 working days may be exceedingly difficult 
to coordinate. It is often the case that businesses have to locate a contractor, negotiate pricing, establish 
a contract, and schedule on-site visits to perform exposure monitoring (due to limited staffing of company 
IH professionals). Further, some operations using 1-BP may occur very infrequently (e.g., only conducted 
quarterly or biannually or annually). For these reasons, in the event that re-sampling is needed, the 
timeline should be longer than 15 days; a 30-60 day resurvey deadline (from the date of the initial event) 
would be less burdensome.  
 
9. EPA is soliciting comment regarding an ECEL action level that is lower than the ECEL and any 
associated provisions related to the ECEL action level. 
Compliance to monitor to the proposed ECEL action level may be difficult.  
 
Currently, the only feasible method to monitor to such a low ECEL action limit is via a small charcoal tube 
(passive monitoring badges do not have a high enough air uptake rate). Using a small charcoal tube, 1-
BP can be detected down to 20% of the proposed ECEL over a full 8-hour work shift.  
 
Thus, due to the low ECEL action level, options for exposure monitoring are severely restricted. 
 

10. EPA requests comment on the feasibility of complying with and monitoring for an ECEL of 
0.05 ppm and an ECEL action level of 0.03 ppm, including occupational exposure monitoring and 
associated analytical methods. In particular, EPA requests comment on changes that may be 
needed in order to meet such a standard, for example changes related to elimination or 
substitution of 1–BP, engineering controls, process changes, or monitoring frequency. EPA is 
also interested in the information on the availability of laboratory capacity needed to meet the 
proposed standard, and the costs associated with such testing.  
Utilizing NIOSH 1500/1501(GC), it is currently feasible to perform employee personal exposure 
monitoring to comply with the ECEL of 0.05 ppm. Via a small charcoal tube (such as SKC 226-01 media) 
with a detection limit of 2.7 micrograms and a flow rate of 0.2 liters per minute, down to 20% of the ECEL 
can be detected on the sample media over the course of a work shift.  
 
Notably, under the NIOSH 1500/1501(GC), it would not be possible to detect 10% of the ECEL over an 8-
hour work shift, as the time required would exceed 480 minutes. Industrial Hygiene professionals often 
use this 10% ECEL value as an important risk-ranking criteria to professionally judge if an exposure is 
“well controlled.” If IHs are unable to establish if a sampling result is specifically <10% the ECEL using the 
NIOSH 1500/1501 method, it will be difficult for IHs (and other safety professionals) to provide certainty in 
their professional evaluations.   
 
11. EPA is soliciting comments regarding the timing of the initial exposure monitoring so that it 
would be representative of all tasks involving 1– BP where exposures may approach the ECEL. 
The timelines proposed for initial exposure monitoring seem to be reasonable for industry and federal 
agencies/contractors working on behalf of a federal agency.  
 
I am concerned, however, about widespread notification of workplace exposure limits and requirements 
via TSCA regulations (as opposed to OSHA). Owners and operators are unlikely to meet the required 
timelines for initial exposure monitoring and subsequent requirements established by TSCA regulations if 
they are not aware of them.  
 
12. EPA requests comment on the timeframes for periodic monitoring outlined in Table 1 of Unit 
IV.A.2. 
The timelines proposed for periodic monitoring appear reasonable and appropriate.  
 
However, the proposed requirement to collect two exposure monitoring measurements (below the ECEL 
action level of <0.03 ppm 8-hr TWA) taken at least seven days apart within a 6-month period appears 
impractical. A requirement of one additional sample (as opposed to two) would suffice as verification of 
exposure below the ECEL action level. 
 
13. EPA requests comment on workplace monitoring for implementation of an ECEL. EPA is 
soliciting information related to the frequency of monitoring, initial monitoring, and periodic 
monitoring that would be needed to demonstrate workplace exposure levels. Specifically, when 
this may impact the frequency of periodic monitoring where initial monitoring shows that 
employee exposures are above the level that would initiate requirements for compliance with the 
ECEL. 
The proposed requirement to collect two exposure monitoring measurements (below the ECEL action 
level of <0.03 ppm 8-hr TWA) taken at least seven days apart within a 6-month period appears 
impractical. A requirement of one additional sample (as opposed to two) would suffice as verification of 
exposure below the ECEL action level. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14. EPA is requesting comment on the proposed timeframe of within 30 days to conduct 
additional exposure monitoring after there has been a change in the production, process, control 
equipment, personnel or work practices that may reasonably be expected to result in new or 
additional exposures at or above the ECEL action level, or when the owner or operator has any 
reason to believe that new or additional exposures at or above the ECEL action level have 
occurred.  
EPA should lengthen the proposed timeframe to conduct additional exposure monitoring following a 
change in production, process, control equipment, personnel or work practices to 45-60 days (as opposed 
to 30 days).  
 
This extended timeframe would allow employers without dedicated Industrial Hygiene staff to locate a 
contractor, negotiate pricing, establish a contract, and schedule an on-site visit (which can be a lengthy 
process) as necessary. 
 
17. EPA is soliciting comment on requiring warning signs to demarcate regulated areas, such as 
the requirements found in OSHA’s General Industry Standard for Beryllium. 
The proposed requirement to require warning signs to demarcate 1-BP regulated areas is appropriate.  
 
The EPA should further specify in the final regulation language to be included in the signage. For 
example, the sign specification that OSHA requires for Beryllium (1910.1024(m)(2)(ii)(B)) includes: 
DANGER 
REGULATED AREA 
BERYLLIUM 
MAY CAUSE CANCER 
CAUSES DAMAGE TO LUNGS 
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY 
WEAR RESPIRATORY PROTECTION AND PERSONAL PROTECTIVE CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT 
IN THIS AREA 
 
18. EPA is requesting comment on whether there should be a requirement to replace cartridges or 
canisters after a certain number of hours, such as the requirements found in OSHA’s General 
Industry Standard for 1,3-Butadiene, or a requirement for a minimum service life of non-powered 
air-purifying respirators such as the requirements found in OSHA’s General Industry Standard for 
Benzene. 
The EPA could feasibly establish a requirement for respirator cartridge change-out schedule similar to the 
OSHA General Industry Standard for 1,3-Butadiene (using the ECEL as the comparison tool and a 
multiplication factor).  
 
Further research would be needed to determine if the respirator cartridge change-out requirements are 
satisfactory (i.e., balancing worker protection with minimization of cartridge waste).  
Development of a 1-BP service life indicator for cartridges would be preferred over keeping track of the 
amount of time a cartridge has been used. 
 
20. EPA requests comment relative to the ability of owners or operators to conduct initial 
monitoring within the timeframes identified in this proposed rule, and anticipated timelines for any 
procedural adjustments needed to comply with the requirements in this proposed rule, including 
establishment of a respiratory protection program and development of an exposure control plan. 
The proposed timelines to conduct initial monitoring appear reasonable for owners or operators with 
dedicated Industrial Hygiene staff and/or established respiratory programs.  
 
The proposed timelines may or may not be adequate for other owners or operators. 
 
21. EPA also requests comment on whether additional time is needed to implement all aspects of 
the WCPP or if there are available substitutes for these applications. 
The proposed timeline appears reasonable for owners or operators with dedicated Industrial Hygiene staff 
and/or established respiratory programs. 

 
The proposed timeline may or may not be adequate for other owners or operators. 
 
22. EPA is soliciting comments on the requirements proposed for appropriate PPE selection. In 
addition, EPA understands that some workplaces rinse and reuse PPE after minimal use and is 
therefore soliciting comments on the impact on effectiveness of rinsing and reusing certain types 
of PPE, either gloves or protective clothing and gear. EPA also requests comment on the degree 
to which additional guidance related to use of PPE might be appropriate. 
It is unclear if the use of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) or multiple-layer laminate glove materials is required for 
the listed occupational uses [manufacturing (import), processing as a reactant, processing as 
incorporation into articles, processing by repackaging, recycling, and disposal], or if all potentially 
exposed persons must wear them. This requirement needs further clarification. 
 
Additionally, while PVA and multiple-layer laminate gloves can withstand exposure to 1-BP for 480 
minutes according to testing, this amount of chemical resistance is not necessary for all applications/uses 
of 1-BP.  
 
As an Industrial Hygienist who frequently provides workers with PPE requirements and recommendations, 
it is my view that PPE selection should be left up to trained safety professionals knowledgeable of the 
work activities and potential for dermal exposure. For example, over prescription of a glove material that 
reduces dexterity may make certain work activities like (e.g., pipetting small amounts of highly corrosive 
acid) more hazardous (by increasing risk of splashes/spills). Further, as PPE research evolves, initial 
requirements made by the EPA may become outdated (e.g., another material provides adequate or 
excellent protection at a fraction of the cost). 
 
26. EPA requests comment on the primary alternative regulatory action (a combination of 
prohibitions, requirements for a WCPP, prescriptive controls, self-certification, and glove use) and 
whether any elements of this primary alternative regulatory action described in this proposed rule 
should be considered as EPA develops the final regulatory action. In particular, EPA is soliciting 
comment on prescribing specific engineering or administrative controls that would reduce 
inhalation exposures enough to address the unreasonable risk across all workplaces engaged in 
a condition of use. EPA also requests comment on any advantages or drawbacks for the timelines 
outlined in Unit IV.B. compared to the timelines identified for the proposed regulatory action in 
Unit IV.A. 
The EPA prescribing specific engineering and/or administrative controls may contribute positively as to 
how owners and operators comply with TSCA regulation. If, however, the controls prescribed are 
exceptionally burdensome, this may lead to negative consequences like companies unable to afford 
compliance measures.  
 
It may be better to suggest or highly encourage the use of certain controls, but to allow for a certain 
amount of professional judgement as long as personal exposures remain below the ECEL or Action 
Level. 
 
Longer compliance timelines are always appreciated when new regulations are implemented. 
 
35. EPA is requesting comment on specific controls that would mitigate the unreasonable risk 
from 1–BP and that could be included as part of a prescriptive workplace controls requirement, 
which could be considered as EPA develops the final regulatory action. Specifically, EPA is 
soliciting comment on combinations of specific engineering controls, administrative controls, and 
PPE that would reduce inhalation exposures to at or below the ECEL of 0.05 ppm as an 8-hour 
TWA for all workplaces where such controls would be required. EPA also is soliciting comment on 
the extent to which such requirements could reduce inhalation exposures to at or below the ECEL 
of 0.05 ppm as an 8-hour TWA. EPA is requesting comment on the compliance timeframe needed 
to implement engineering controls, administrative controls, and PPE that reduce inhalation 
exposures to at below the ECEL of 0.05 ppm as an 8- hour TWA for all regulated entities. 
Additionally, EPA is requesting any existing monitoring data that could inform whether a WCPP or 

prescriptive controls with a PPE program is a more appropriate regulatory action for industrial 
and commercial use of 1–BP in batch vapor degreasing. 
It is difficult to recommend specific controls for general operations due to each workplace having different 
processes, work practices, operational set-ups, etc.  
 
Suggestions for general controls include: 
• 
Elimination: conduct work processes remotely 
• 
Engineering: enclose/contain work processes 
• 
Administrative: conduct process unattended (typically start at the end of a work shift and continue 
overnight or over the weekend) 
 
In terms of implementation of new/novel Industrial Hygiene controls (which may completely change work 
processes), adequate planning (likely a year or more) and significant funds are likely needed.  
 
42. EPA requests comment on whether owners and operators should be required to attest to 
whether and why the exposure controls they have selected would not result in increased releases 
of 1–BP to ambient air from the workplace, and keep records of that statement as part of the 
WCPP exposure control plan. 
An attestation statement regarding whether and why exposure controls selected would not result in 
increased releases of 1-BP to ambient air from the workplace does not seem especially effective as it is 
likely to be viewed as an unnecessary add-on to administrative burden by stakeholders.  
 
It would be more effective to require environmental air (emission) data that proves 1-BP is not being 
released to ambient air from outside of local exhaust stacks. 
 
 
Thank you for your time and consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
Asheton Gilbertson 
Industrial Hygienist

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0139 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
Vapor degreasing: suggestions for clear, effective sustainable rules for 1-BP, MC, 
TCE, and PCE
Barbara Kanegsberg and Ed Kanegsberg, BFK Solutions
We have reviewed rules and proposed rules for1-BP, MC, TCE, and PCE and are 
making the following suggestions to EPA as a possible win-win approach. The proposed 
rule for 1-BP (nPB), includes interesting, innovative ideas that will make compliance and 
interpretation more accessible to the manufacturing community. We include 
suggestions to U.S. EPA Amended TSCA to harmonize rules for the four solvents, codify 
the final rules in a single location, recognize the potential for catastrophic impact on 
patient and public safety of “regrettable substitution” and suggest EPA add Reduced 
Pressure Sealed Systems as a class of cleaning equipment with built-in engineering 
controls. While our comments and suggestions focus on issues related to vapor 
degreasing, some might be adaptable to other regulatory aspects. 
Suggestion: Harmonize the final rules for MC, TCE, PCE, and1-BP (nPB)
As of September 22, 2024, while each rule or proposed rule represents a high level of 
thoughtful effort, very different and puzzling conclusions have been reached. Perhaps 
one or two EPA representatives for each solvent could form an overarching group to 
distill and build on the approach for each of the four solvents.  Just as the ECEL for MC, 
TCE, PCE, and1-BP (nPB) would be consolidated into a single document (Proposed 1-
BP rule, Unit I C (vi) ), consider issuing a single document for risk management for the 
four solvents. At the very least, change the wording for all four solvents so that in the 
final rules, the approach to risk management is similar.  
Our wish is that each harmonized rule include the following 
• Allow vapor degreasing – the ban for MC is arbitrary
• Emphasize and clarify the route of self-certification
• Recognize a category for Reduced Pressure, Sealed Systems (1) and include the 
proviso for other demonstrated technologies
• Because the criticality of cleaning depends on the end-use of the product being 
cleaned, included in each final rule, the four cleaning categories (General, Precision, 
Safety/Critical, and R&D) as defined in Section 7.7 of the Economic Analysis for 1-BP 
(proposed 1-BP rule: Unit IX Reference 3).
• Remove what appear to us to be arbitrary, unjustifiable exemptions and what might be 
perceived as special treatment for aerospace, NASA, and government facilities. 
Suggestion: Provide mechanisms for those involved in safety/critical cleaning to 
continue to use validated, established technology. For that category, allow use of 
a worker exposure level such as Cal/OSHA or ACGIH as opposed to the ECEL. 
As we explained in our August 2024 newsletter (2), Safety/Critical Cleaning is a 
category where, if the product is not cleaned appropriately, airplanes drop out of the sky 
and peoples tushies fall off. The risks associated with inadequate cleaning are 
unacceptable; product failure can result in multiple deaths or injuries. While the category 

Safety/Critical Cleaning appears in the economic analysis for 1-BP; we have not found 
mention in any of the final or proposed rules. The category must be recognized.
Safety/Critical Applications require extensive, time-consuming, costly validation and 
verification. Manufacturers balk at changing any cleaning process. For many medical 
devices, costs can run into the millions of dollars. 1-BP, TCE, MC, and PCE have similar 
molecular structures and therefor similar functions; moving from one to another is 
sometimes referred to as an “in-kind” substitution. A highly stringent regulatory 
restriction or a shortage brought on by those restrictions can force businesses to 
change to another solvent. While changes in Safety/Critical processes require process 
development and revalidation, there is less risk and, frankly less effort, for in-kind 
substitution than for moving to not in-kind substitution (using a very different molecule or 
blend). The regulations need to have similar language and to have to have similar 
requirements. It is unrealistic, risky and unnecessary to force manufacturers to interpret 
the differences between rule after complex rule. Harmonization is essential.
In addition to having EPA provide the option of self-certification for 1-BP and for the 
other three halogenated solvents for safety/critical applications, we strongly suggest that 
for this Safety/Critical category, EPA allow a worker exposure level that has been 
relatively recently established by an agency or group like Cal/OSHA (DOSH) or ACGIH. 
For safety/critical applications, the risk of adopting a cleaning agent or process that has 
not been thoroughly tested needs to include risks to the public of product failure as well 
as the risks of worker, ONU and neighborhood exposure. 
These suggestions are analogous to the way the category of “precision cleaning” allows 
for more acceptable options under the EPA Significant New Alternatives Policy (SNAP) 
Program. The Safety/Critical category should be designed so as not to pressure or even 
encourage business to change processes without complete revalidation and testing. 
Unless it can be shown that the combined risk, including that from product failure, is not 
increased by requiring an alternative process, an established albeit higher exposure 
limit should be allowed to continue. This option is important for manufacturers upstream 
in the supply chain as well as final assembly.
Suggestion: Recognize and foster the use of reduced pressure, sealed systems
What we have termed ‘reduced pressure, sealed systems’ are a cleaning technology 
that includes engineering controls to minimize air emissions and worker exposure (1). 
We suggest that such systems be recognized and included in each rule as a specific 
category. Terms like closed loop or airless do not describe the technology and can be 
misconstrued. Wording could be included to encourage development of this and other 
effective cleaning systems that reduce emissions to acceptable levels.
Details
The 1-BP rule recognizes either open-top degreasers (OTVD) or “closed loop batch 
vapor degreasers.” The term “closed loop” does not accurately or unambiguously 
describe a category of cleaning machine that minimizes both air emissions and worker 
exposure. The term can be mis-interpreted to include systems that redistill the solvent 

for re-use but do not necessarily reduce emissions to near zero. In contrast with open 
top degreasers, in a reduced pressure sealed system, there is no interface between the 
cleaning solvent and air when parts are introduced to or removed from the cleaning 
chamber. Solvent is not introduced into the cleaning chamber until the chamber has 
been closed, sealed and the internal pressure has been reduced. The chamber is not 
re-opened until solvent has been removed from the chamber, returned to storage 
container(s) and the cleaned product is dry. Final trace solvent residue can be captured 
in carbon.
Section 7.7 of the Economic Analysis for 1-BP includes the costs of replacing an OTVD 
using 1-BP with an airless degreaser containing PCE. The analysis does not include the 
option to use an airless degreaser containing 1-BP. 
We suggest the term “airless degreaser” be replaced by “Reduced Pressure, Sealed 
System.” The term ‘airless’ relates to SCAQMD rules developed during the mid-1990s. 
Airless is neither descriptive nor accurate; the cleaning systems do not achieve a true 
“airless” state. They provide containment by being sealed and operating at a reduced 
pressure, not necessarily a hard vacuum. 
Notes:
A - These comments expand on “Survival of the Fittest, Critical Cleaning, and EPA 
Amended TSCA Rules - Coping with Change,” originally published in “Clean Source,
The Official Journal of the Cleaning Lady and the Rocket Scientist” August 2024. This 
feature article was submitted to this docket on 9/21/2024. The following additional 
comments and suggestions also draw from “Understand and Address the Regulatory 
Landscape--(Survival tactics for effective product cleaning & manufacturing),” presented
by Ed Kanegsberg at the Parts Cleaning Conference (PPC) in Chicago, Sept 10, 2024.
B - Our comments and suggestions are based on the conviction that, for sustainable 
regulations, it is essential to optimize worker safety, achieve environmental protection, 
maintain product quality, and support U.S. manufacturing. Our clients include 
manufacturers of product and components, the military, government (including the U.S 
EPA), as well as providers and advocates of cleaning chemicals and cleaning 
processes. Our three decades of working with our clients inform our viewpoint. That 
said, our opinions are our own; and we have not used client funding for this 
article/submission.
References and links:
1. B. Kanegsberg and E. Kanegsberg, “Survival of the Fittest, Critical Cleaning, and 
EPA Amended TSCA Rules - Coping with Change,” Clean Source, The Official 
Journal of the Cleaning Lady and the Rocket Scientist,  August 2024, 
https://bfksolutions.com/survival-of-the-fittest-critical-cleaning-and-epa-amended-
tsca-rules-coping-with-change/
2. B. Kanegsberg and E. Kanegsberg, “Degreasers”, Clean Source, The Official 
Journal of the Cleaning Lady and the Rocket Scientist, January, 2024, 
https://bfksolutions.com/degreasers/

Contacts:
Barbara Kanegsberg: barbara@bfksolutions.com
Ed Kanegsberg: ed@bfksolutions.com

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0143 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
1050 K ST, NW | 6th Floor | Washington, DC 20001 | autosinnovate.org
September 23, 2024
Submitted through: https://www.regulations.gov.
Ms. Bethany Masten
Existing Chemicals Risk Management Division
Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics
Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20460-0001
RE: 1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA);
Proposed Rule, EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471
Dear Ms. Masten:
The Alliance for Automotive Innovation (Auto Innovators)1 appreciates the opportunity to provide
comments on EPA’s proposed risk management rule: “1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Regulation Under
the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA).”2
EPA is proposing in this rule to:

Prohibit the manufacture (including import), processing, and distribution in commerce of
1-BP for all consumer uses (excluding insulation for building and construction materials).

Prohibit the manufacture (including import), processing and distribution in commerce of 1-
BP for four industrial and commercial uses and applications, including uses in adhesives
and sealants, in dry cleaning solvents, spot cleaners and stain removers, in coin and
scissor cleaner (liquid, spray, or aerosol cleaners), and in other uses in arts, crafts, hobby
materials (adhesive accelerant); automotive care products (engine degreaser, brake
cleaner and refrigerant flush and anti-adhesive agents (mold cleaning and release
product); functional fluids (closed/open systems)—refrigerant/cutting oils.

Require strict workplace controls, including a 1-BP Workplace Chemical Protection
Program (WCPP), which would include requirements to meet an inhalation exposure
concentration limit, for seven occupational conditions of use of 1-BP.

Require the use of prescriptive controls for six occupational conditions of use of 1-BP.

Require purchasers to provide sellers with a self-certification, which would document the
purchaser’s commitment to comply with the 1-BP WCPP, for six occupational conditions
of use of 1-BP.

Establish recordkeeping and downstream notification requirements.
1 Auto Innovators represents the full auto industry, including the manufacturers producing most vehicles sold in
the U.S., equipment suppliers, battery producers, semiconductor makers, technology companies, and
autonomous vehicle developers. Our mission is to work with policymakers to realize a cleaner, safer, and
smarter transportation future and to maintain U.S. competitiveness in cutting-edge automotive technology.
Representing approximately 5 percent of the country’s GDP, responsible for supporting nearly 10 million jobs,
and driving $1 trillion in annual economic activity, the automotive industry is the nation’s largest manufacturing
sector. www.autosinnovate.org.
2 89 Fed. Reg. 65,066 (Aug. 8, 2024).

1050 K ST, NW | 6th Floor | Washington, DC 20001 | autosinnovate.org
A review of the data currently available to our members appears to indicate that there is little if any
use of 1-BP at this time. We would, however, like to address a specific question EPA posed in this
proposed rule as EPA’s understanding of this issue is critical not only for this rulemaking but for all
TSCA risk evaluations and management rules. Specifically:
EPA also requests comment on whether, rather than just excluding the consumer and
commercial uses of 1–BP in insulation from the prohibitions and other requirements in
this risk management rulemaking, EPA should more broadly exclude the use of articles
under TSCA section 6(c)(2)(E), which would also exclude the use of 1–BP in articles
that were not specifically evaluated in the 2020 Risk Evaluation for 1–BP, and if so,
whether and how to define ‘‘article’’ for the purposes of this rulemaking.3
In addition to articles, Auto Innovators would also like to address automotive replacement parts, a
related and crucial issue.
Articles
Section 6(c) of TSCA requires that EPA shall apply prohibitions or other restrictions to an article or
category of articles containing the chemical substance or mixture only to the extent necessary to
address the identified risks from exposure to the chemical substance or mixture from the article:
In selecting among prohibitions and other restrictions, the Administrator shall apply
such prohibitions or other restrictions to an article or category of articles containing the
chemical substance or mixture only to the extent necessary to address the identified
risks from exposure to the chemical substance or mixture from the article or the
category of articles so that the substance or mixture does not present an unreasonable
risk of injury to health or the environment identified in the risk evaluation conducted in
accordance with subsection (b)(4)(A).4
This provision limits EPA’s authority to regulate articles in commerce. EPA’s authority is clearly
limited to applying regulatory restrictions on articles only if there is an unreasonable risk finding
pursuant to a risk evaluation, and even then “only to the extent necessary” to address those
identified risks. Therefore, without a risk evaluation, the agency’s authority to regulate articles in this
rulemaking and in all others under TSCA section 6(a) is substantially limited. Auto Innovators agrees
that EPA should broadly exclude the use of articles under TSCA section 6(c)(2)(E) in this and other
rulemakings. Auto Innovators urges EPA to apply the TSCA section 6(c) provisions at the risk
evaluation stage and only include articles in subsequent risk management provisions if warranted.
Auto Innovators is concerned that in past proposed and final rules where articles have been included
as a condition of use, EPA has not identified what exposures are occurring as a direct result of the
“exposure to the chemical substance or mixture from the article.” The associated use documents
appear to make no distinction between the exposures, risks, and impacts associated with direct
chemical exposure versus any potential limited or negligible exposure to a chemical bound into an
article.
3 Id. at 65,078.
4 15 U.S.C. § 2605(c)(2)(E) (emphasis added).

1050 K ST, NW | 6th Floor | Washington, DC 20001 | autosinnovate.org
Replacement Parts
TSCA Section 6(c)(2)(D) directs EPA to exempt replacement parts for complex durable goods and
complex consumer goods that are designed prior to the date of publication in the Federal Register of
a rule under TSCA Section 6(a).
The Administrator shall exempt replacement parts for complex durable goods and
complex consumer goods that are designed prior to the date of publication in the
Federal Register of the rule under subsection (a), unless the Administrator finds that
such replacements parts contribute significantly to the risk, identified in a risk evaluation
conducted under subsection (b)(4)(A), to the general population or to an identified
potentially exposed or susceptible subpopulation.5
TSCA requires EPA to “exempt replacement parts for complex durable goods and complex
consumer goods” except in instances where the “replacement parts contribute significantly to the
risk” identified in the risk evaluation. Therefore, EPA’s Section 6(a) authority is limited to applying
regulatory restrictions on replacement parts only if there is a risk evaluation under Section 6(b)(4)(A)
that finds unreasonable risk. If the risk evaluation finds that there is an unreasonable risk, the
agency must provide evidence that the replacement parts contribute significantly to that risk.
Imposing regulatory requirements on replacement parts manufactured to repair vehicles will be cost-
prohibitive. To redesign or reengineer a part, including validation of the durability, reliability, and
safety for a vehicle no longer in production, is not a workable option. If pre-existing replacement
parts for older models are subject to Section 6 regulation, a series of significant results could follow:
 
Replacement parts would not be available for needed repairs, and consumers would not be
able to repair their vehicles, which would devalue their investment in a vehicle.
 
Automotive safety may be jeopardized as “workarounds” are developed to extend the life of
individual vehicles.
 
Repair shops and companies that manufacture and use these parts would be significantly
disadvantaged by losses in revenue and stock value.
As with articles, Auto Innovators recommends that EPA broadly exclude uses of replacement parts.
Conclusion
In conclusion, while we have no specific comments on 1-BP at this time, Auto Innovators
appreciates the opportunity to reiterate our past concerns abouts EPA’s lack of implementation of
TSCA Sections 6(c)(2)(E) on articles and 6(c)(2)(D) on replacement parts. We look forward to
understanding how EPA will implement these provisions and recommend that EPA engage with
members of the regulated community to fully understand the implications of these key provisions of
the Lautenberg Chemical Safety Act. We would welcome the opportunity to meet with EPA staff to
more fully explain our concerns.
5 Id. § 2605(c)(2)(D).

1050 K ST, NW | 6th Floor | Washington, DC 20001 | autosinnovate.org
Sincerely,
Catherine Palin
Alliance for Automotive Innovation

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0145 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
1 
 
September 23, 2024 
 
Submitted via Regulations.gov 
Dr. Michal Freedhoff 
Assistant Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency 
Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: 
1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act 
(TSCA), Docket No. EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
Dear Assistant Administrator Freedhoff: 
 
The undersigned organizations submit these comments on EPA’s proposed risk 
management rule (the “Proposed Rule”) for 1-bromopropane (“1-BP”).1 
1-BP is a highly toxic, carcinogenic solvent that is “widely used” in occupational and 
consumer applications.2  Every year, roughly a million pounds of 1-BP is released into the 
environment, exposing communities near polluting facilities to this dangerous chemical.3  And 
 
1 1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), 89 Fed. 
Reg. 65,066 (Aug. 8, 2024) (“Proposed Rule”). 
2 Proposed Rule at 65,066; see also id. at 65,101. 
3 Data from the Toxics Release Inventory (“TRI”) over the last several years shows that 
approximately a million pounds of 1-BP has been disposed of or otherwise released each year.  
See EPA, Releases: Chemical Report, TRI Explorer (2022), 
https://enviro.epa.gov/triexplorer/release_chem?p_view=USCH&trilib=TRIQ1&sort=_VIEW_&
sort_fmt=1&state=All+states&county=All+counties&chemical=0000106945&industry=ALL&y
ear=2022&tab_rpt=1&fld=RELLBY&fld=TSFDSP (2022 TRI on-site and off-site reported, 
disposed of, or otherwise released, for all industries, for 1-BP in the U.S.); EPA, Releases: 
Chemical Report, TRI Explorer (2021), 
https://enviro.epa.gov/triexplorer/release_chem?p_view=USCH&trilib=TRIQ1&sort=_VIEW_&
sort_fmt=1&state=All+states&county=All+counties&chemical=0000106945&industry=ALL&y
ear=2021&tab_rpt=1&fld=RELLBY&fld=TSFDSP (same for 2021); EPA, Releases: Chemical 
Report, TRI Explorer (2020), 
https://enviro.epa.gov/triexplorer/release_chem?p_view=USCH&trilib=TRIQ1&sort=_VIEW_&
sort_fmt=1&state=All+states&county=All+counties&chemical=0000106945&industry=ALL&y
ear=2020&tab_rpt=1&fld=RELLBY&fld=TSFDSP (same for 2020); EPA, Releases: Chemical 
Report, TRI Explorer (2019),  
https://enviro.epa.gov/triexplorer/release_chem?p_view=USCH&trilib=TRIQ1&sort=_VIEW_&
sort_fmt=1&state=All+states&county=All+counties&chemical=0000106945&industry=ALL&y
ear=2019&tab_rpt=1&fld=RELLBY&fld=TSFDSP (same for 2019).  Actual releases may be 
higher, given that not all facilities are required to report to the TRI, the potential for inaccurate 
reporting, and the fact that so-called “de minimis” concentrations of 1-BP may evade reporting 
under EPA’s current regulations.  

2 
 
every year, millions of pounds of 1-BP are produced in the U.S., 4 exposing workers and 
consumers who use 1-BP and products containing 1-BP.  EPA correctly found that 1-BP—“as a 
whole chemical”5—presents unreasonable risk to human health. 
But EPA’s risk evaluation failed to evaluate the full suite of risks posed by 1-BP, and its 
Proposed Rule does not eliminate all of 1-BP’s unreasonable risks, as TSCA requires.6  In its risk 
evaluation, EPA did not determine whether fenceline communities—either as a segment of the 
general population or as a “potentially exposed or susceptible subpopulation” that EPA is 
statutorily mandated to consider7—face unreasonable risks to 1-BP.8  EPA’s proposed risk 
management rule, which prohibits very few 1-BP uses and allows some 97% of the chemical’s 
current production volume to continue without any meaningful protections for fenceline 
communities, compounds that error.  Despite finding cancer risks to fenceline communities in 
excess of unreasonable risk benchmarks, EPA’s Proposed Rule largely ignores those risks and 
does not adopt provisions that would eliminate them.  Instead, EPA inappropriately relies on 
hypothetical future regulation under the Clean Air Act to address risks that dozens of 
communities are experiencing today,9 while ignoring material differences between that statute 
and TSCA and violating TSCA’s independent mandate to eliminate 1-BP’s unreasonable risks. 
Every day, residents of fenceline communities suffer unacceptable risks of cancer 
because of their exposures to 1-BP.  A strong risk management rule that eliminates those risks is 
not only EPA’s best opportunity to protect fenceline communities, but it is also necessary to 
comply with TSCA.  We urge EPA to revise the Proposed Rule as set forth below and to finalize 
a rule that fully eliminates 1-BP’s unreasonable risks, including the unreasonable risks to 
fenceline communities that EPA illegally overlooked in its risk evaluation. 
I. 
TSCA REQUIRES EPA TO ELIMINATE A CHEMICAL’S UNREASONABLE 
RISK 
“[T]he overarching purpose of . . . TSCA is to protect the public from chemicals that pose 
an unreasonable risk to health and the environment.”10  To address the full array of risks from 
chemicals, TSCA authorizes EPA to “look comprehensively” at the hazards of a chemical “in 
 
4 Proposed Rule at 65,070. 
5 EPA, 5. Unreasonable Risk Determination at 19 (Dec. 2022) (“Revised Risk Determination”), 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-12/1-BP_Final%20Revised%20RD_12-12-
22.pdf. 
6 See 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a) (requiring EPA to regulate a chemical “to the extent necessary so that 
[it] . . . no longer presents [unreasonable] risk”). 
7 Id. § 2605(b)(4)(A). 
8 See EPA, Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide) (Aug. 2020) (“2020 Risk 
Evaluation”), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-08/documents/risk_evaluation_for_1-
bromopropane_n-propyl_bromide.pdf. 
9 Proposed Rule at 65,101–02. 
10 Food & Water Watch, Inc. v. EPA, 302 F. Supp. 3d 1058, 1066 (N.D. Cal. 2018); see also S. 
Rep. No. 94-698 at 1 (1976) (“The purpose of [the TSCA bill] is to prevent unreasonable risks of 
injury to health or the environment associated with the manufacture, processing, distribution in 
commerce, use, or disposal of chemical substances.”). 

3 
 
total,”11 considering “the full extent of human or environmental exposure.”12  In 2016, Congress 
overhauled TSCA, adopting new provisions to “enhance[e] EPA’s authority to regulate 
chemicals.”13  As part of the 2016 amendments, Congress adopted a two-step process for 
assessing and regulating existing chemicals:  First, EPA must evaluate a chemical and determine 
whether it poses unreasonable risks to human health or the environment, and second, if EPA 
finds unreasonable risk, then EPA must regulate the chemical to the extent necessary to eliminate 
that risk.14 
 
TSCA requires EPA to conduct risk evaluations on existing chemicals “to determine 
whether a chemical substance presents an unreasonable risk of injury to health or the 
environment.”15  This determination must be made “without consideration of costs or other 
nonrisk factors.”16  And TSCA expressly requires EPA to consider and determine whether the 
chemical poses “an unreasonable risk to a potentially exposed or susceptible subpopulation” 
(“PESS”),17 defined as “a group of individuals within the general population” who, “due to either 
greater susceptibility or greater exposure,” face a “greater risk than the general population of 
adverse health effects from exposure to a chemical substance.”18  As EPA has recognized, 
“potentially exposed or susceptible subpopulation[s]” may include “individuals or communities 
experiencing higher levels of exposure to a chemical substance due to geography (e.g., fenceline 
communities in close proximity to facilities emitting air pollutants . . . )” or due to “aggregate 
exposures via multiple conditions of use (e.g., a worker who lives in close proximity to facilities 
emitting air pollutants).”19  It can also include “communities that due to their proximity to a 
higher proportion of industrial emitters may be experiencing greater burden” and are thus more 
susceptible to harm from chemical exposures.20 
 
Under TSCA, if EPA determines that a chemical presents unreasonable risk, EPA must 
issue a risk management rule that fully eliminates that risk.21  In the 2016 amendments, Congress 
eliminated TSCA’s mandate to address unreasonable risks using the “least burdensome” means, 
which lawmakers said had “paralyzed EPA and prevented [it] from regulating some extremely 
toxic chemicals.”22  In place of the prior directive to minimize regulatory burdens and costs, 
 
11 S. Rep. No. 94-698 at 2 (1976). 
12 H.R. Rep. No. 94-1341 at 6 (1976). 
13 162 Cong. Rec. 7981 (2016) (statement of Sen. Markey). 
14 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a), (b)(4). 
15 Id. § 2605(b)(4)(A). 
16 Id. 
17 Id. 
18 15 U.S.C. § 2602(12). 
19 Procedures for Chemical Risk Evaluation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), 89 
Fed. Reg. 37,028, 37,039–40 (May 3, 2024). 
20 Id. at 37,040. 
21 See 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a). 
22 162 Cong. Rec. 7498 (2016) (statement of Sen. Markey); see also 162 Cong. Rec. 7984 (2016) 
(explaining that, by “delet[ing] the paralyzing ‘least burdensome’ requirement in the existing law 
and instruct[ing] that EPA’s rule must ensure that the chemical substance or mixture ‘no longer 
 

4 
 
Congress required EPA to regulate a chemical that presents unreasonable risk “to the extent 
necessary so that the chemical substance . . . no longer presents such risk,” using one or more of 
seven broad risk management tools listed in the statute.23  In selecting among risk management 
tools, EPA must consider four criteria: (i) the effects of the chemical on health and the magnitude 
of exposure to human beings; (ii) the effects of the chemical on the environment and the 
magnitude of exposure to the environment; (iii) the benefits of the chemical for various uses; and 
(iv) the “reasonably ascertainable economic consequences of the proposed rule,” including the 
cost effectiveness and costs and benefits of the proposed and final regulatory action and at least 
one alternative regulatory action the Administrator considered.24  TSCA requires EPA to factor 
those considerations into its risk management decisions “to the extent practicable,”25 but it does 
not dictate how EPA is to weigh those factors or direct EPA to adopt a regulatory option where 
benefits outweigh the costs.26  That is, when more than one risk management option would 
satisfy TSCA’s mandate to eliminate a chemical’s unreasonable risk, EPA no longer needs to 
select the lowest cost or least burdensome one.27  Any risk management rule EPA adopts must be 
supported by substantial evidence in the administrative record taken as a whole.28 
II. 
EPA FOUND THAT 1-BP PRESENTS UNREASONABLE RISK, BUT IT 
FAILED TO EVALUATE THE FULL EXTENT OF THAT RISK 
“EPA has determined that 1-BP[,] as a whole chemical substance[,] presents an 
unreasonable risk of injury to health under the conditions of use.”29 Exposure to 1-BP is 
associated with a host of adverse health effects, including developmental, reproductive, liver, 
kidney, and neurotoxicity, as well as cancer.30  As EPA has acknowledged, some of these health 
harms—in particular, developmental toxicity and cancer—are irreversible.31  Despite the known 
toxicity of 1-BP, every year tens of millions of pounds of this chemical are produced32 and nearly 
a million pounds are released to the environment,33 where 1-BP is slow to degrade in the 
 
presents’ the unreasonable risk identified in the risk evaluation,” the amended TSCA “clearly 
rejects the regulatory approach and framework that led to the failed asbestos ban and phase-out 
rule of 1989”). 
23 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a). 
24 Id. § 2605(c)(2)(A). 
25 Id. § 2605(c)(2)(B). 
26 See 162 Cong. Rec. 7984 (2016) (explaining that the revised TSCA “do[es] not require EPA to 
demonstrate benefits outweigh costs, to definitively determine or select the least-cost alternative, 
or to select an option that is demonstrably cost-effective or is the least burdensome adequately 
protective option”). 
27 See id. 
28 See 15 U.S.C. § 2618(c)(1)(B)(i)(I). 
29 Revised Risk Determination at 19.  
30 See id. at 7; 2020 Risk Evaluation at 194–200. 
31 See Revised Risk Determination at 4. 
32 See 2020 Risk Evaluation at 46–47. 
33 See note 3 supra.  

5 
 
atmosphere and “can be transported over long distances.”34  As a result, workers, fenceline 
communities, consumers, and the general public are exposed to this harmful chemical.  And 
though EPA has found that 1-BP poses unreasonable risks, it has failed to evaluate the full extent 
of the risks to those facing these harmful exposures. 
In 2020, EPA finalized a risk evaluation under the amended TSCA that evaluated 25 
conditions of use of 1-BP and found that the majority of conditions of use posed unreasonable 
risks to human health.35 This risk evaluation applied EPA’s former approach that determined 
whether individual uses of a chemical—rather than the chemical as a whole—posed 
unreasonable risk.36  In multiple other ways, the 2020 risk evaluation illegally disregarded and 
understated 1-BP’s risks, including, most notably, by: 
• Failing to evaluate risks to the general population from ambient air and disposal 
pathways for any conditions of use37; 
• Assuming the use of personal protective equipment (“PPE”) for worker exposure 
scenarios38; 
• Failing to identify fenceline communities as potentially exposed or susceptible 
subpopulations, and failing to evaluate the risks faced by those groups,39 in 
violation of TSCA’s mandate to evaluate risks to “potentially exposed or 
susceptible subpopulation[s]” who experience “greater exposure” to a chemical 
than the general public40; and 
• Failing to aggregate exposures to 1-BP across exposure routes.41 
EPA also understated 1-BP’s non-cancer risks.  In its risk evaluation and subsequent 
fenceline assessment, EPA selected a chronic point of departure (“POD”) of 6 parts-per-million 
(“ppm”) or higher for the general public, based on EPA’s analysis of developmental risks.42  
 
34 EPA, Draft TSCA Screening Level Approach for Assessing Ambient Air and Water Exposures 
to Fenceline Communities Version 1.0 at 62 (Jan. 2022) (“Fenceline Assessment Methodology”), 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2022-01/draft-fenceline-report_sacc.pdf. 
35 2020 Risk Evaluation at 41–42. 
36 See id. 
37 See id. at 39; see also Earthjustice, Comments on Toxic Substances Control Act (“TSCA”) 
Science Advisory Committee on Chemicals Review of Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane, 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OPPT-2019-0235 at 2–5 (Aug. 30, 2019) (“1-BP SACC Comments”) 
(attached as Exhibit A) (raising concerns with draft 1-BP risk evaluation).  
38 See 2020 Risk Evaluation at 39–40; see also 1-BP SACC Comments at 1–2; Earthjustice and 
OSH Law Project LLC, Comments on Draft Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (“1-BP”), 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OPPT-2019-0235 (Oct. 11, 2019) (raising concerns with draft 1-BP risk 
evaluation).  
39 See 2020 Risk Evaluation at 303–04. 
40 15 U.S.C. §§ 2605(b)(4)(A), 2602(12).  
41 See 2020 Risk Evaluation at 305; see also 1-BP SACC Comments at 9. 
42 Memorandum from Kevin Vuilleumier, Env’t Eng’r, Existing Chem. Risk Assessment Div. 
EPA to Joel Wolf, Chief, Existing Chem. Risk Mgmt. Div., EPA Re: 1-Bromopropane: Fenceline 
 

6 
 
Dividing that POD by EPA’s total uncertainty factor of 100 would result in a reference 
concentration of 0.06 ppm. 43  In 2023, however, the California Office of Environmental Health 
Hazard Assessment (“OEHHA”) calculated a far lower chronic reference concentration of 0.3 
parts-per-billion (0.0003 ppm), reflecting the “concentration at which adverse noncancer health 
effects would not be expected from continuous chronic exposure to 1-BP.”44  OEHHA calculated 
this toxicity value based on findings of neurotoxicity risks from 1-BP exposure that exceed the 
developmental risks EPA calculated in its risk evaluation.45  EPA’s decision to base its evaluation 
and proposed regulation of 1-BP on a less protective endpoint significantly understates 1-BP’s 
risks and leaves fenceline communities and other exposed populations (including workers) 
facing unacceptable risks.  
In 2022, EPA revised its ultimate risk determination for 1-BP, addressing some—but not 
all—of the flaws in the 2020 risk evaluation.  First, EPA abandoned its illegal use-by-use 
approach to risk evaluations and instead applied a framework that considered whether the 
chemical, as a whole, presents unreasonable risks.46  EPA explained that this “whole chemical 
approach is appropriate for 1-BP because there are benchmark exceedances for multiple 
conditions of use (spanning across most aspects of the chemical lifecycle . . . ) for health and the 
risk of health effects . . . associated with 1-BP exposures are irreversible.”47  Under this corrected 
framework, EPA determined that 1-BP “presents an unreasonable risk of injury to health under 
the conditions of use;”48 this determination was “driven by risks associated with [all but two] 
conditions of use, considered singularly or in combination with other exposures.”49 
Second, EPA stated that it would not rely on assumptions about the use of PPE in making 
its unreasonable risk determination for 1-BP.  EPA acknowledged that “unreasonable risk may 
exist for subpopulations of workers that may be highly exposed” because they are not protected 
 
Technical Support – Ambient Air Pathway at 4 (June 16, 2023) (“2023 Fenceline Assessment”).; 
2022 Risk Evaluation at 230, tbl. 3-8. 
43 See 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 4. 
44 Ca. EPA, 1-Bromopropane Reference Exposure Levels Technical Support Document for the 
Derivation of Noncancer Reference Exposure Levels Appendix D1 at 92 (Apr. 2023), 
https://oehha.ca.gov/media/downloads/crnr/1-bpsrprel052823.pdf (attached as Exhibit B).  
45 Id.  Similarly, the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (“ATSDR”) used 
neurotoxicity as the basis for its chronic inhalation Minimal Risk Level for 1-bromopropane.  
See ATSDR, Toxicological Profile for 1-Bromopropane at 13–14 (Aug. 2017), 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/ToxProfiles/tp209.pdf.  
46 See Revised Risk Determination at 3 (“EPA has reconsidered two key aspects of the risk 
determinations for 1-BP published in August 2020.  First, EPA has determined that the 
appropriate approach to these determinations is to make an unreasonable risk determination for 
1-BP as a whole chemical substance, rather than making unreasonable risk determinations 
separately on each individual condition of use evaluated in the risk evaluation.”). 
47 Id. at 4. 
48 Id. at 1. 
49 Id. 

7 
 
by occupational safety standards for 1-BP or because those standards are insufficiently 
stringent.50 
Finally, EPA announced that it was “conducting a screening approach to assess risks from 
pathways excluded from evaluation for several of the first 10 chemicals,” including 1-BP.51  As 
noted above, the 2020 1-BP risk evaluation did not evaluate the air exposure pathway.52  EPA 
claimed that the “goal” of this screening approach was to “remedy this exclusion and to 
determine if there may be risks that were unaccounted for in the 1-BP risk evaluation.”53  
Evaluating and addressing such risks is necessary to comply with TSCA; as EPA has explained, 
“[t]he approach to exclude certain exposure pathways . . . resulted in a failure to consistently and 
comprehensively address potential exposures to potentially exposed or susceptible 
subpopulations, including fenceline communities (i.e., communities near industrial facilities).”54  
Thus, while EPA did not name fenceline communities as a PESS in its revised risk determination, 
it has recognized that its risk evaluation may have disregarded relevant risks of injury posed by 
1-BP—including to fenceline communities that EPA has acknowledged are a relevant PESS—in 
violation of TSCA.  And indeed, EPA’s subsequent analysis confirmed that it disregarded 
relevant risks:  As explained below, EPA’s assessment found risks exceeding relevant 
benchmarks in the area around dozens of facilities emitting 1-BP. 
III. 
1-BP POSES UNREASONABLE RISK TO FENCELINE COMMUNITIES, 
AND EPA’S PROPOSED RULE FAILS TO ADDRESS THAT RISK 
Although EPA failed to consider the risks to fenceline communities in its initial risk 
evaluation or revised risk determination, EPA “recognizes there is exposure to the general 
population from the ambient air pathway for 1-BP, including fenceline communities.”55  In order 
to “determine if there is the potential for unreasonable risk to fenceline communities associated 
with air . . . exposures,”56 EPA conducted a “screening approach” that considered whether 
emissions of 1-BP posed risks to those in the vicinity of an emitting facility.57  EPA’s analysis 
was incomplete and understated 1-BP exposures and associated risks, but even with its flaws, it 
found that people in the vicinity of dozens of facilities faced risks far exceeding EPA’s 
benchmarks for unreasonable risk.  Instead of proposing risk management measures that would 
address this risk, EPA appears to dismiss the results of its analysis, stating: “While the use of this 
screening approach indicates that EPA is not able to quantify reduced risk or find that there are 
 
50 Id. at 3. 
51 Id. 
52 Id. 
53 Id. 
54 News Release, EPA, EPA Announces Path Forward for TSCA Chemical Risk Evaluations 
(June 30, 2021), https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-announces-path-forward-tsca-chemical-
risk-evaluations.  
55 Proposed Rule at 65,101. 
56 News Release, EPA, EPA Announces Path Forward for TSCA Chemical Risk Evaluations.  
57 Proposed Rule at 65,101. 

8 
 
no potential risks to fenceline communities, the screening approach was not designed to facilitate 
the making of an unreasonable risk determination for these communities.”58   
EPA’s approach violates TSCA.  EPA is required to eliminate the unreasonable risks 
posed by 1-BP as a whole chemical.  To do so, however, EPA must address all of the 
unreasonable risks that 1-BP presents, even if EPA ignored or understated those risks in its risk 
evaluation.  EPA’s Proposed Rule does not eliminate unreasonable risks to fenceline 
communities, as TSCA requires, and it cannot be finalized as proposed.59  
a. EPA Ignored Relevant Exposures in Calculating Risks to Fenceline 
Communities 
Following its risk evaluation, EPA conducted a fenceline screening analysis to determine 
whether 1-BP posed risks to fenceline communities, ultimately concluding that it does.  
However, that analysis understated the true extent of risks faced by fenceline communities 
because it failed to consider all of their relevant exposures to 1-BP.  EPA undercounted exposures 
by failing to consider combined exposures from multiple facilities or other sources of 1-BP, and 
it irrationally assumed that individuals are exposed to 1-BP for a maximum of 33 years. 
In 2022, EPA released a preliminary evaluation of the risks from 1-BP faced by fenceline 
communities.  EPA used a “screening level methodology” to evaluate the potential exposures and 
risks faced by people near facilities releasing chemicals undergoing risk evaluation to the 
ambient air.60  In it, EPA acknowledged that these fenceline communities—“[m]embers of the 
general population that are in proximity to air emitting facilities”—“may be disproportionately 
exposed to a chemical undergoing risk evaluation under TSCA section (6).”61  EPA preliminarily 
evaluated exposures and risks associated with 1-BP through the ambient airway pathway using 
2019 TRI data and calculating cancer risk with reference to a cancer benchmark of 1-in-
1,000,000, which EPA explained “is consistent with the cancer benchmark used for general 
population cancer risk in several other EPA programs and in previous risk evaluations.62  EPA 
found that risk was indicated for at least one facility for 13 out of 14 occupational exposure 
scenarios (“OES”),63, 64 and for 52 of the 64 real or surrogate facilities evaluated.65  EPA found 
 
58 Id. (emphasis added). 
59 See 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a), (b)(4)(A). 
60 Fenceline Assessment Methodology at 9.  
61 Id. at 9, 16. 
62 Id. at 54; see id. at 82–89. 
63 As described in the Fenceline Assessment Methodology, “[w]hen assessing exposures for 
industrial/commercial conditions of use (COUs), EPA generally defines an occupational 
exposure scenario or scenarios (OES for both) to capture the basic, underlying source of 
exposure for a given COU.  Although the proposed screening level methodology does not 
involve evaluation of occupational exposures, EPA carries the OES label through this work to 
allow categorization of multiple facilities which may be involved with a single COU.”  Id. at 11. 
64 Id. at 82; but see 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 6 n.13 (clarifying that “[t]he 2022 fenceline 
analysis . . . identified 12 OES for which there were risk estimates above the benchmark for 
cancer”). 
65 Fenceline Assessment Methodology at 88. 

9 
 
that fenceline community exposures were anticipated for 35 of the facilities for which risk was 
indicated and for which EPA had GIS locations,66 concluding that “facilities indicating risk are 
likely of concern to an expected fenceline community cohort.”67  
EPA’s screening analysis did not, however, fully account for fenceline communities’ 
potential exposures and risks.  For 1-BP specifically, EPA omitted major sources of 1-BP to air 
that were reported to the TRI in 2019.68  And as a general matter, EPA unrealistically assumed 
that community members were only exposed to a single source, via a single exposure route, 
without any exposures to other chemicals or non-chemical stressors that increase their 
susceptibility to harm.69  That is, the “screening approach” did not consider the risks that a 
community faces from being exposed to a chemical from multiple sources, including from 
multiple facilities emitting the same chemical.  Indeed, members of EPA’s Science Advisory 
Committee on Chemicals (“SACC”) warned that “the proposed screening methodology was not 
protective because of the lack of consideration for cumulative exposures, multiple source 
exposures, or additional risk factors such as stress, poverty, and/or diet that may interact to affect 
exposures.”70  They noted that a “lack of consideration[] for these factors may underestimate the 
adverse effects from environmental exposures in fenceline communities.”71  And the SACC, as a 
whole, criticized EPA’s use of a single year of release data in its exposure modeling.  The SACC 
recommended that EPA should instead use “[m]aximum or high centile values emission rates 
during the past few years (e.g., five years before the assessment) . . . in models.”72 
EPA addressed one of these flaws in a 2023 fenceline analysis that it conducted 
specifically for 1-BP in ambient air, but it failed to remedy the others.  Following the SACC’s 
recommendation, EPA evaluated risks from 1-BP releases over multiple years to account for the 
variation in emissions from one year to the next, in addition to a single-year analysis that 
 
66 Id. 
67 Id. at 89. 
68 Black Women for Wellness et al., Comments on EPA’s Draft TSCA Screening Level Approach 
for Assessing Ambient Air and Water Exposures to Fenceline Communities Version 1.0, Docket 
No. EPA-HQ-OPPT-2021-0415 at 20–21 (Mar. 22, 2022) (attached as Exhibit C) (“Fenceline 
Assessment Methodology Comments”). 
69 See Fenceline Assessment Methodology at 11 (“EPA is not providing a proposed methodology 
for conducting screening level analyses for aggregate/cumulative exposures in this work.”); id. at 
7–10. 
70 Memorandum from Alaa Kamel, PhD, Sci. Advisory Comm. on Chems., EPA to Denise 
Keehner, Dir., Off. of Pollution Prevention and Toxics, EPA Re: Meeting Minutes and Final 
Report: A Set of Scientific Issues Being Considered by the Environmental Protection Agency 
Regarding Draft TSCA Screening Level Approach for Assessing Ambient Air and Water 
Exposures to Fenceline Communities Version 1.0 at 38 (May 16, 2022), 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2021-0415-0095 (“SACC Report on 
Fenceline Assessment Methodology”) (attached as Exhibit D). 
71 Id.  
72 Id. at 23; see also id. at 17 (“Release data used in modeling should include maximum or high 
centile release data over multiple years (not from a single year of data).”). 

10 
 
considered 1-BP emissions from only 2019 TRI data.73  As explained below, EPA’s multi-year 
fenceline analysis showed that communities surrounding many facilities faced increased cancer 
risks far exceeding EPA’s own standard cancer benchmark and the benchmark EPA chose to use 
“for cancer risk in fenceline communities.”74  This result is particularly concerning given that 
EPA found these risks while incorporating unrealistically low exposure assumptions in the 2023 
analysis. 
First, EPA analyzed the risk associated with exposures from a single facility in isolation.  
That is, EPA did not consider the exposures faced by communities that are exposed to 1-BP from 
multiple sources, such as: those who live near multiple facilities that emit 1-BP, those who are 
exposed to 1-BP at work and live near a facility that emits it, or those who live near an emitting 
facility and also use products that contain 1-BP.75  This failure to aggregate exposures violates 
TSCA, which requires EPA to regulate a chemical when there are unreasonable risks posed by 
“the manufacture, processing, distribution in commerce, use, or disposal of a chemical substance 
. . .  or . . . any combination of such activities.”76  It also violates TSCA’s mandate to evaluate 
and regulate chemicals “in a manner consistent with the best available science,”77 which requires 
consideration of exposures from multiple sources.78  And it means that EPA’s assessment of such 
risks does not reflect the real-world experience of fenceline communities. 
Indeed, EPA’s 2023 multi-year fenceline analysis calculated risks from 1-BP exceeding 
EPA’s cancer benchmarks from multiple facilities in close proximity to one another.  For 
example, two such facilities—Exotic Metals Forming Co. and Hytek Finishes Co.—are located 
in Kent, Washington.79  A third facility located in Kent, Protective Coatings Inc., has recently 
released over twenty thousand pounds of 1-BP in a single year.80  Because EPA did not aggregate 
exposures faced by communities in proximity to more than one of these facilities, it necessarily 
understated the risks it calculated to those communities. 
 
73 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 2. 
74 Id. at 8–9; Fenceline Assessment Methodology at 54. 
75 While the Proposed Rule would prohibit most (but not all) consumer uses of 1-BP, EPA also 
solicited comment on a “de minimis” exception that could leave people exposed to 1-BP from 
widely used products. See pp. 30-32 infra.  
76 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a) (emphasis added). 
77 Id. § 2625(h). 
78 See Swati D.G. Rayasam et al., Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) Implementation: How 
the Amended Law Has Failed to Protect Vulnerable Populations from Toxic Chemicals in the 
United States, 56 Env’t Sci. & Tech. 11969, 11973 (2022), 
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.est.2c02079 (“Using the best available science, as required by TSCA, 
means EPA must quantify the aggregate exposures and cumulative risks.”). 
79 See Figure 1 infra; see also 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 18 (showing elevated cancer risks 
from Exotic Metals Forming Co. (TRI-FID 98032XTCMT5411S) and Hytek Finishes Co. (TRI-
FID 98032HYTKF8202S)). 
80 See Figure 1 infra. 

11 
 
 
Figure 1. Facilities emitting 1-BP in a selected area of Kent, Washington. 
Second, EPA failed to evaluate cumulative risks to people who are exposed to 1-BP in 
addition to other chemicals that cause similar health effects.  Communities near facilities that 
emit 1-BP are likely to also be exposed to toxic chemicals from other facilities given that 
“[f]acilities with 1-BP fenceline risks are often close to many other TRI-emitting facilities.”81  
And some of these communities also face higher-than-average National Air Toxics Assessment 
cancer risks.82  Communities that are exposed to multiple other carcinogens are more susceptible 
to harm from carcinogenic 1-BP than communities without those cumulative exposures.83 The 
 
81 EPA, Economic Analysis of the Proposed Regulation of 1-Bromopropane Under TSCA Section 
6(a), Docket No. EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 at 10–16 (July 2024)(“Economic Analysis”), 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0114 (click “Download”).  
82 Id. 
83 See EPA, Technical Support Document: EPA’s 2014 National Air Toxics Assessment, at 133 
(Aug. 2018), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2018-
09/documents/2014_nata_technical_support_document.pdf (“In NATA, we assume that 
exposures to multiple carcinogens can be added together to estimate risks … [T]his 
 

12 
 
failure to consider co-exposures to other carcinogenic chemicals understates the true risk facing 
fenceline communities and violates TSCA’s mandate to fully evaluate risks, including to groups 
who “may be at greater risk than the general population” due to “greater susceptibility” to harm 
from 1-BP.84 
Third, EPA unrealistically assumes that no one is exposed to 1-BP in the air for more than 
33 years,85 a figure presumably based on the estimate of “residential occupancy period”—the 
amount of time that people will remain in a given residence—in EPA’s Exposure Factors 
Handbook.86  This assumption significantly understates risks to the potentially exposed or 
susceptible subpopulations who spend their entire lives in the same community.  EPA’s 33-year 
estimate also improperly equates the time that someone lives in a given residence with the 
duration of their environmental exposure to a given chemical, as if everyone who moves within 
or from a fenceline community ends up in a pristine environment.  But nearly two-thirds of all 
moves occur within the same county,87 and many people may move within the same municipality 
or neighborhood.  EPA also ignores the racial, socio-economic, and cultural factors that limit 
geographic mobility, including familial or cultural ties to a particular community, as well as the 
effect of environmental contamination on property values, making it harder for many fenceline 
community residents to sell their homes and relocate.88  The SACC has previously advised EPA 
that its assumption of a 33-year lifetime exposure duration is “inadequate for PESS communities 
and arguably invalid for the general population as well.”89 
 
 
straightforward calculation is widely used to estimate cumulative risks.”); cf. Sydney Evans & 
Monica Amarelo, Chemical Mixtures May Interact and Raise Cancer Risks, Env’t Working Grp., 
https://www.ewg.org/tapwater/chemical-mixtures-may-interact-and-raise-cancer-risks.php (last 
visited Sept. 20, 2024).   
84 15 U.S.C. § 2602(12). 
85 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 3, 4. 
86 EPA, Exposure Factors Handbook at 16-8, tbl. 16-5 (Nov. 2011), 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2015-09/documents/efh-chapter16.pdf.  
87 U.S. Census Bureau, Table. A-1:Annual Geographic Mobility Rates by Type of Movement – 
1948–2022, CPS Historical Migration/Geographic Mobility Tables 
https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/demo/tables/geographic-mobility/time-
series/historic/hst_mig_a_1.xlsx (last visited Sept. 11, 2023). 
88 See Dorceta Taylor, Toxic Communities: Environmental Racism, Industrial Pollution, and 
Residential Mobility at 88-89 (NYU Press) (2014); id. at 89 (discussing how property values 
surrounding hazardous waste sites in Toledo fell “fell by about $12,100 per mile from each waste 
site”); id. at 90 (“Almost 20% of [surveyed New Jersey tax assessors] reported that close 
proximity to hazardous waste sites depressed property values, and the effects were most 
pronounced within a quarter-mile radius of the sites.”). 
89 Memorandum from Alaa Kamel, PhD, Sci. Advisory Comm. on Chems., EPA to Denise 
Keehner, Dir., Off. of Pollution Prevention and Toxics, EPA Re: Meeting Minutes and Final 
Report: 2023 Draft Supplement to the 1,4-Dioxane Risk Evaluation at 49 (Nov. 16, 2023), 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2022-0905-0078.  

13 
 
b. Despite its Underinclusive Assessment, EPA Still Calculated Unreasonable 
Risks to Fenceline Communities 
EPA’s multi-year fenceline analysis found that there are dozens of facilities with expected 
exposures of 1-BP to fenceline communities and found severe risk in the areas surrounding many 
facilities.90  The analysis again evaluated the risks to fenceline communities with a reference to 
the standard cancer benchmark of 1-in-1,000,000 increased cancer risk and found that the areas 
surrounding 47 different facilities had risks above this benchmark at distances at least 100 meters 
from the facility.91  The areas around many of these facilities had risks far exceeding the 
benchmark,92 sometimes by orders of magnitude.93  Indeed, multiple facilities had years with 
emissions where the associated lifetime increased cancer risks were above 1-in-10,000.94  And as 
EPA recognized, exposures from many of the facilities with risks exceeding the benchmark were 
expected to reach fenceline communities that are at least one kilometer from the facility.95 
These findings compel a conclusion that 1-BP presents unreasonable risks to fenceline 
communities.  The 1-in-1,000,000 cancer risk benchmark EPA selected in its fenceline 
assessments has been endorsed by the SACC, who recommended that this benchmark “should be 
used in the fenceline assessments.”96  EPA admits that its fenceline analysis “indicates risk to 
fenceline communities,” yet claims that it is “unable to determine” whether these risks 
“contribute to the unreasonable risk” posed by 1-BP.97  But EPA cannot shirk its obligation under 
TSCA to “determine whether a chemical substance presents an unreasonable risk of injury to 
health or the environment . . . including an unreasonable risk to a potentially exposed or 
susceptible subpopulation.”98  And it cannot comply with TSCA’s mandate to regulate 1-BP “to 
the extent necessary so that [it] no longer presents [unreasonable] risk” if it leaves communities 
exposed to elevated cancer risks exceeding EPA’s longstanding unreasonable risk benchmark.99 
 
90 Proposed Rule 65,102 (“Overall, the land use analysis identified a total of 49 facilities . . . with 
expected exposure to fenceline communities.”). 
91 Proposed Rule at 65,101; see id. (“In this screening level fenceline analysis for the ambient air 
pathway for 1-BP, estimates of risk to fenceline communities were calculated with reference to a 
1 x 10-6 benchmark for cancer risk.”). 
92 See 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 13–26. 
93 See, e.g., 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 14–23 (29 facilities showing cancer risks in excess of 
1 x 10-5). 
94 See, e.g., 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 17 (TRI Facility ID 72764MRCNT1603F showing 
cancer risks in 2018 of 1.01 x 10-4 for central tendency exposures and 1.11 x 10-4 for high 
exposures); id. at 18 (TRI Facility ID 98033WSTRN8356T showing cancer risks in excess of 1 x 
10-4 based on 2016, 2018, and 2019 release data).  1-in-10,000 risks are also referred to in these 
comments as 100-in-1,000,000 risks. 
95 See 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 26 (showing 16 facilities with risk estimates above the 
cancer benchmark and exposures to fenceline communities when analyzed at 1,000 meters). 
96 SACC Report on Fenceline Assessment Methodology at 28; see also id. at 27–28. 
97 Proposed Rule at 65,101. 
98 15 U.S.C. § 2605(b)(4)(A). 
99 Id. § 2605(a). 

14 
 
c. EPA’s Proposed Rule Fails to Address Unreasonable Risks to Fenceline 
Communities 
As proposed, EPA’s rule does not eliminate the unreasonable risks 1-BP poses to 
fenceline communities, and it therefore does not comply with TSCA.100  TSCA requires EPA to 
adopt risk management measures “to the extent necessary so that [a chemical] no longer 
presents” unreasonable risk, including an “unreasonable risk to a potentially exposed or 
susceptible subpopulation.”101  Fenceline communities experience greater exposure to chemicals, 
including 1-BP, than the general population and therefore constitute a potentially exposed or 
susceptible subpopulation that EPA is statutorily mandated to protect.102  Indeed, in its Proposed 
Rule, EPA recognizes that “potentially exposed or susceptible subpopulation[s]” may include 
fenceline communities.103 
EPA appears to acknowledge that, despite this mandate, the risk management measures 
proposed will not eliminate the serious risks facing fenceline communities.104  EPA has not 
proposed emissions limits or other regulations of fenceline community exposures.  Instead, the 
Proposed Rule is almost entirely focused on the regulation of occupational and consumer 
exposures to 1-BP, with the bulk of the proposed measures involving a Workplace Chemical 
Protection Program (“WCPP”) that limits exposures occurring inside a facility.105  EPA does 
propose to require employers self-certify that the exposure controls selected as part of this WCPP 
“do not increase emissions of 1-bromopropane to ambient air outside of the workplace and 
whether additional equipment was installed to capture or otherwise prevent increased emissions 
of 1-bromopropane to ambient air.”106  But this directive to self-certify falls far short of what is 
needed to address the risks faced by fenceline communities.  EPA has not proposed any stack- or 
fenceline-monitoring requirements to enforce this provision, leaving no way to measure 
 
100 Id.  
101 Id. § 2605(a), (b)(4)(A).  
102 See 15 U.S.C. § 2602(12); 40 C.F.R. § 702.33 (defining potentially exposed or susceptible 
subpopulation to include overburdened communities). 
103 Proposed Rule at 65,079 (“EPA considers people in communities in proximity to facilities 
using 1–BP who are exposed to 1–BP through the ambient air pathway to constitute a subset of 
the general population and categorizes them as fenceline communities; they may also be 
considered PESS.”).  Even if fenceline communities were not a potentially exposed or 
susceptible subpopulation, EPA would still be required to eliminate unreasonable risks facing 
them as a “subset of the general population.” Id.; see also 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a) (requiring EPA to 
regulate chemicals “to the extent necessary” so that they no longer pose unreasonable risk). 
104 See, e.g., Proposed Rule at 65,103 (explaining that EPA is proposing to prohibit conditions of 
use associated with only two of the 47 facilities showing risks to fenceline communities and that, 
for these two facilities, “exposures to any fenceline communities from these facilities would be 
addressed under the prohibitions in the proposed rulemaking”). 
105 See Proposed Rule at 65,103 (“Under the proposed regulatory action described in Unit IV.A., 
most of the conditions of use with an indication of potential risk to fenceline communities would 
be subject to requirements of the 1–BP WCPP . . . . ”). 
106 Proposed Rule at 65,118–19. 

15 
 
employers’ compliance.  Even if facilities did comply, this provision does not: (1) require any 
reductions in existing fenceline community exposures and risks, which already exceed EPA’s 
unreasonable risk benchmark, or (2) prevent 1-BP emissions from increasing for reasons other 
than compliance with workplace exposure limits, such as the projected increase in the 
manufacturing of 1-BP over the coming years. 
 
EPA does propose to prohibit certain conditions of use associated with facilities that emit 
dangerous amounts of 1-BP, and those prohibitions should be finalized.  However, as EPA 
acknowledges in the preamble to its Proposed Rule, these prohibitions affect only 3% of the 
current production volume of 1-BP and only two out of 47 facilities for which EPA found risk to 
fenceline communities.107  EPA cannot rely on this minimal and facially inadequate regulation to 
address the risks that it has found to fenceline communities. 
In addition to violating TSCA, EPA’s failure to address 1-BP’s risks to fenceline 
communities is also inconsistent with EPA’s past statements and current guidance concerning the 
evaluation of fenceline community risks.  As mentioned above, EPA relied on its TSCA 
Screening Level Approach for Assessing Ambient Air and Water Exposures to Fenceline 
Communities Version 1.0 (the “Fenceline Assessment Methodology”) to evaluate 1-BP’s risks to 
impacted communities.108  The purpose of that methodology is to determine whether “there may 
be unreasonable risk to [fenceline] communities” that require either mitigation under TSCA or 
further analysis.109  To make that determination, EPA “use[d] reasonably available data” to 
“evaluate exposures to fenceline communities and characterize risks” from “air and water 
pathways previously not evaluated in published risk evaluations.”110  “The calculated risks were 
then compared to the benchmark values,” including a “[1-in-1,000,000] . . . benchmark for cancer 
risk in fenceline communities.”111  
Where, as here, EPA calculates risk above that benchmark level, the Fenceline Assessment 
Methodology outlines several options for addressing those risks.  According to EPA, those options 
include: (1) issuing a risk management rule that “reduce[s] . . . releases to levels below which an 
unreasonable risk [to fenceline communities] is expected,”112 (2) “referring such risk findings to be 
managed under another EPA administered Federal law” that could eliminate the chemical’s 
unreasonable risks,113 or (3)  “undertak[ing] additional analysis” and “supplement[ing] the 
published risk evaluation” to refine its risk calculations and confirm whether the risks are 
unreasonable.114  Under no circumstance, however, does the Fenceline Assessment Methodology 
 
107 See Proposed Rule at 65,069, 65,103. 
108 Proposed Rule at 65,074. 
109 News Release, EPA, EPA Announces Path Forward for TSCA Chemical Risk Evaluations. 
110 Fenceline Assessment Methodology at 11. 
111 Id. at 43, 54. 
112 Id. at 19. 
113 Id. at 20; see also 15 U.S.C. § 2608(b). 
114 Fenceline Assessment Methodology at 20; see also News Release, EPA, EPA Announces Path 
Forward for TSCA Chemical Risk Evaluations (“If the agency finds through the application of 
the screening-level approach that there may be unreasonable risk to these communities that 
 

16 
 
permit EPA to leave fenceline communities exposed to elevated risks that EPA has neither further 
evaluated nor determined not to be unreasonable. 
Yet that is precisely what EPA has done in the proposed 1-BP rule.  As described above, 
EPA calculated extensive fenceline risks above its cancer risk benchmarks, triggering the need for 
mitigation or a supplemental risk evaluation under EPA’s Fenceline Assessment Methodology.115  
But EPA left the vast majority of those risks unaddressed,116 with no mandatory reductions in 1-BP 
releases, no supplemental analysis,117 and no finding that any other laws would eliminate the risks 
identified by EPA.118  In addition to violating TSCA, EPA’s “‘[u]nexplained inconsistency’ in 
agency policy” renders the proposed 1-BP rule arbitrary and capricious.119  
d. EPA Cannot Rely on Future Clean Air Act Rulemakings in Lieu of Issuing a 
TSCA Risk Management Rule to Eliminate Risk to Fenceline Communities 
EPA cannot rely on the potential for future regulation of 1-BP under the Clean Air Act to 
satisfy its obligations in this rulemaking to eliminate unreasonable risk faced by fenceline 
communities.  EPA states that it “expects that this proposed action, in combination with the 
emissions standards resulting from anticipated revisions to [National Emissions Standards for 
Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP)] requirements following the designation of 1–BP as a 
[hazardous air pollutant], would reduce risk sufficiently to the general population and fenceline 
communities.”120  Accordingly, EPA “seek[s] comment on its conclusions, and whether, 
consistent with TSCA section 9(b), any other statutory authorities administered by EPA should 
be used to take additional regulatory action identified as necessary to protect against such 
risk.”121 
EPA cannot rely on future Clean Air Act rulemakings to avoid its duties here.  First, EPA 
has not made the requisite determinations under section 9(b) that would allow it to use the Clean 
Air Act to address the risk it has found.  Second, any such determinations would be contrary to 
TSCA, arbitrary, and unsupported by substantial evidence.  Finally, relying on the mere prospect 
of future discretionary rulemakings would violate section 9(b)’s mandate that EPA shall take 
action under another statute to address risk. 
 
 
cannot be addressed . . . through the risk management approaches the agency is already 
considering, EPA will conduct a more comprehensive exposure assessment of fenceline 
communities and supplement the risk evaluation for that chemical with the new information.”). 
115 Proposed Rule at 65,102. 
116 Id. at 65,103. 
117 Id. (“EPA does not intend at this time to revisit the air pathway for 1–BP as part of a 
supplemental risk evaluation.”). 
118 Id. at 65,106–107. 
119 Encino Motorcars, LLC v. Navarro, 579 U.S. 211, 222 (2016) (citation omitted). 
120 Proposed Rule at 65,103; see also id. at 65,101 (asserting that the proposed risk management 
rules, “in combination with EPA’s designation of 1–BP as a HAP (87 FR 393) and subsequent 
CAA-required NESHAPs, particularly for vapor degreasing, is expected to reduce risk”). 
121 Id. at 65,103. 

17 
 
1. EPA has not made the requisite 9(b) determinations 
Section 9(b) of TSCA authorizes EPA to “coordinate” its actions under TSCA, including 
risk management, “with actions taken under other Federal laws administered in whole or in part 
by the Administrator.”122  EPA must employ TSCA unless EPA determines under section 9(b) 
that the unreasonable risk associated with a chemical “could be eliminated or reduced to a 
sufficient extent by actions taken” under another environmental statute.123  “Sufficient” here 
means that the actions taken under another act accomplish TSCA’s mandate to eliminate 
unreasonable risk.  Additionally, as TSCA requires compliance deadlines for risk management 
rules that eliminate unreasonable risk “as soon as practicable but not later than 5 years after the 
date of promulgation of the rule,”124 an action taken under another statute must similarly 
eliminate the unreasonable risk within the same timeframes to be “sufficient.”  Even if EPA 
makes the formal determination that another EPA-administered statute “could” eliminate the 
unreasonable risk posed by 1-BP, EPA must nonetheless use TSCA to manage risks where “it is 
in the public interest to protect against such risks” by acting under TSCA.125  Thus, even if 
another statute, such as the Clean Air Act, “could” be used to sufficiently regulate the risks posed 
by 1-BP, EPA must also ascertain whether the public interest nonetheless requires EPA to 
regulate under TSCA. 
Here, EPA has not made the requisite determinations that future Clean Air Act regulation 
“could” sufficiently eliminate unreasonable risk and that it is not in the public interest to use 
TSCA, let alone supported such conclusions with substantial evidence.  Instead, the Proposed 
Rule simply contains EPA’s conjecture that it “expects” that Clean Air Act rulemakings can 
reduce risk.126  There is no evidence to support those conclusory statements, let alone substantial 
evidence.  Because EPA has not made the requisite section 9(b) determinations, EPA cannot rely 
on the prospect of future Clean Air Act regulations to avoid promulgating TSCA risk 
management regulations here. 
2. Future Clean Air Act rules do not lawfully meet the section 9(b)’s 
requirements 
Moreover, not only has EPA failed to make the requisite section 9(b) determinations, it 
could not rationally and lawfully do so on the basis of future Clean Air Act actions.  Here, two 
factors confirm that future actions under the Clean Air Act are not sufficient or in the public 
interest: (1) the numerous substantive differences between section 112 of the Clean Air Act and 
section 6 of TSCA; and (2) the practical realities of EPA’s implementation of section 112. 
Additionally, TSCA section 9(b) mandates that if EPA makes the predicate finding to use 
another EPA-administered statute to eliminate unreasonable risk, EPA “shall use such authorities 
to protect against such risk.”127  Thus, the statute imposes a mandatory obligation on EPA to use 
 
122 15 U.S.C. § 2608(b)(1). 
123 Id. 
124 15 U.S.C. § 2605(d)(1)(A). 
125 15 U.S.C. § 2608(b)(1). 
126 Proposed Rule at 65,103. 
127 15 U.S.C. § 2608(b)(1). 

18 
 
those other authorities and to do so in a manner that will sufficiently protect against risk.  EPA 
cannot rely on future, discretionary actions that, even if taken, are not required to eliminate the 
unreasonable risk EPA found under TSCA.  
First, the legal requirements for standard-setting under TSCA and the Clean Air Act 
differ in two key ways, meaning it is likely that future Clean Air Act standards issued will not be 
“sufficient” to eliminate unreasonable risk.  
1.  
Different Risk Benchmarks: Under EPA’s Clean Air Act framework, the level of risk 
that typically triggers regulation is less stringent than that which EPA has used under TSCA.  
Given those differences and EPA’s fenceline risk estimates for 1-BP, future Clean Air Act 
regulations are unlikely to eliminate the unreasonable risk posed by 1-BP. 
In its TSCA risk evaluation for 1-BP, EPA used a 1-in-1,000,000 cancer risk benchmark 
to identify unreasonable risks to consumers or the general population.128  In its Fenceline 
Assessment Methodology and subsequent multi-year analysis, EPA reaffirmed the use of that 
benchmark for fenceline communities under TSCA.129  
But EPA has not taken as stringent an approach under the Clean Air Act.  While EPA 
recognizes that the statute requires the Agency to conduct a rulemaking if cancer risk is above 1-
in-1,000,000, it treats this level as “an aspirational goal” to achieve.130  Instead, in the course of 
such a rulemaking, “EPA will generally presume that if the risk to [the maximum exposed] 
individual is no higher than approximately one in 10 thousand [i.e., 100-in-1,000,000], that risk 
level is considered acceptable.”131  That presumptive benchmark is 100 times less stringent than 
what EPA has used under TSCA.  Consequently, communities cannot count on EPA’s 
administration of Clean Air Act section 112(f) for assuring as much protection as TSCA would 
provide, because standards that EPA might deem legally sufficient for Clean Air Act purposes 
would not be sufficient to ensure that a chemical “no longer presents [unreasonable] risk” under 
the TSCA framework EPA has adopted.132 
 
128 2020 Risk Evaluation at 273 (“For consumers or the general population . . . 1x10-6 is applied 
as a benchmark.”). 
129 Fenceline Assessment Methodology at 54 (“EPA used 1x10-6 as the benchmark for cancer risk 
in fenceline communities.”); 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 4 (“In the 2022 fenceline analysis 
and this multi-year analysis, EPA uses 1x10-6 as the benchmark for the cancer risk to individuals 
in the general population (e.g., fenceline communities).”). 
130 Nat. Res. Def. Council v. EPA, 529 F.3d 1077, 1082 (D.C. Cir. 2008). 
131 EPA, CAA Section 112 Risk and Technology Reviews: Statutory Authority and Methodology, 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0155-0560 at 3 (Dec. 14, 2017), 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-0155-0560 (click “Download”) 
(first alteration in original) (quoting National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants; 
Benzene Emissions From Maleic Anhydride Plants, Ethylbenzene/Styrene Plants, Benzene 
Storage Vessels, Benzene Equipment Leaks, and Coke By-Product Recovery Plants, 54 Fed. 
Reg. 38,044, 38,045 (Sept. 14, 1989)). 
132 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a). 

19 
 
In addition, there are prominent examples where EPA has refused to issue Clean Air Act 
rules to bring risk below even the 100-in-1,000,000 benchmark and has left communities subject 
to cancer risk above that extreme level.  This is because EPA has sometimes treated this 
benchmark as more discretionary than binding in its administration of section 112.133  For 
example, in a 2005 rulemaking for Coke Oven Batteries, EPA found that the maximum 
individual cancer risk was 300-in-1,000,000 but nonetheless found that level of risk to be 
acceptable.134  The final standards EPA adopted for that source category only reduced cancer risk 
to 270-in-1,000,000, nearly three times the Clean Air Act benchmark.135 And in a 2020 
rulemaking for Miscellaneous Organic Chemical Manufacturing, EPA applied the benchmark to 
find that the cancer risk due to allowable emissions was 800-in-1,000,000 and thus unacceptable, 
but it issued rules that still left some community members exposed to a cancer risk of 200-in-
1,000,000.136 Communities have been calling on EPA to reduce the unacceptability benchmark 
used under the Clean Air Act because it is outdated and does not protect children or fenceline 
communities exposed to multiple types of sources simultaneously, but so far EPA has not 
changed or updated this benchmark. 
 
For 1-BP, EPA’s fenceline analysis finds that facilities in a number of different industries 
exceed TSCA’s unreasonable risk benchmark of 1-in-1,000,000 but fall below EPA’s Clean Air 
Act benchmark of 100-in-1,000,000 for regulation under section 112(f).  Indeed, EPA found that 
only a handful of facilities had risks exceeding the 100-in-1,000,000 Clean Air Act 
benchmark.137  For the dozens of remaining facilities that fall under the 100-in-1,000,000 risk 
level but exceed TSCA’s 1-in-1,000,000 risk benchmark,138 EPA is unlikely to regulate the risks 
 
133 EPA, CAA Section 112 Risk and Technology Reviews: Statutory Authority and Methodology at 
3–4 (“Consequently, the presumptive risk level of 100-in-1 million (1-in-10 thousand) provides a 
benchmark for judging the acceptability of maximum individual lifetime cancer risk, but does 
not constitute a rigid line for making that determination.”); see also EPA Off. of Inspector 
General, EPA Should Conduct New Residual Risk and Technology Reviews for Chloroprene- and 
Ethylene Oxide-Emitting Source Categories to Protect Human Health at 3 (May 6, 2021), 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2021-05/documents/_epaoig_20210506-21-p-0129.pdf 
(“A maximum individual risk level of less than 100 in one million is generally considered 
acceptable, but the overall determination of risk acceptability is also dependent on other health 
measures and factors, including the chronic and acute noncancer risks, number of people 
exposed at various risk levels, and uncertainties.”). 
134 National Emission Standards for Coke Oven Batteries, 70 Fed. Reg. 19,992, 19,993–94 (Apr. 
15, 2005). 
135 Id. at 19,994. 
136 National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Miscellaneous Organic Chemical 
Manufacturing Residual Risk and Technology Review, 85 Fed. Reg. 49,084, 49,096 (Aug. 12, 
2020); see also id. at 49,094 (explaining that EPA’s decision not to bring risk below the Clean Air 
Act benchmark was due to what the Agency called “uncertainties” in emission data and health 
effects determination).  
137 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 17, 18. 
138 See id. at 14–23. 

20 
 
posed by 1-BP emissions in future section 112(f) rulemakings, establishing that Clean Air Act 
regulations will not be “sufficient.”139 
2. 
Discretionary Standard Setting for Area Sources: Additionally, as interpreted by EPA, 
setting risk-based standards for area sources is largely discretionary under the Clean Air Act, 140 
and the Agency has largely declined to set risk-based standards for area sources.  Thus, for any 
facility where EPA found that the risk posed by 1-BP exceeds the benchmark for community 
risks but that is classified as an area source under the Clean Air Act, future section 112 
rulemakings are unlikely to sufficiently reduce the risk. 
For example, in setting standards for area source dry cleaners, EPA refused to reduce 
risks that significantly exceed the 100-in-1,000,000 benchmark.  In a 2006 rulemaking for this 
source category, the record demonstrated that the maximum individual cancer risk for ordinary 
area source dry cleaners was 220-in-1,000,000, and that for those dry cleaners co-located with 
other commercial businesses, the risk was 1,000-in-1,000,000.141  Despite these extremely high 
cancer risks, EPA declined to set standards in the 2006 rulemaking, and following a voluntary 
remand in which EPA promised to expeditiously reconsider this decision,142 it has recently 
reaffirmed that it does not intend to set standards designed to reduce these risks.143 
The vast majority of facilities which EPA’s fenceline analysis identifies as presenting 
unreasonable risk to the communities at the fenceline are area sources under the Clean Air Act. 
EPA’s ECHO database only identifies as major sources 14 of the facilities that EPA found to 
present unreasonable risk.144  In future Clean Air Act rulemakings for the facilities that are area 
 
139 15 U.S.C. § 2608(b)(1). 
140 42 U.S.C. § 7412(d)(5), (f)(5) (authorizing EPA to set area source standards based on 
generally available control technologies, a technological approach, in lieu of setting health-based 
standards under 112(f)). 
141 See Sierra Club & Earthjustice, Comments on Proposed National Perchloroethylene Air 
Emission Standards for Dry Cleaning Facilities Technology Review at 1, Docket No. EPA-HQ-
OAR-2005-0155 (Feb. 22, 2022), https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OAR-2005-
0155-0603 (click “Download”). 
142 Id. 
143See National Perchloroethylene Air Emission Standards for Dry Cleaning Facilities 
Technology Review, 86 Fed. Reg. 73,207, 73,217 (Dec. 27, 2021). 
144 EPA, Albemarle Corporation-South Plant Detailed Facility Report, ECHO, 
https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-facility-report?fid=110000743508 (last updated May 13, 2024);  
EPA, American Cast Iron Pipe Co Detailed Facility Report, ECHO, 
https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-facility-report?fid=110000366611(last updated May 13, 2024); 
EPA, Elsa LLC Detailed Facility Report, ECHO, https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-facility-
report?fid=110000396161(last updated May 13, 2024); EPA, Emerald Transformer PPM LLC 
Detailed Facility Report, ECHO, https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-facility-report?fid=110017392739 
(last updated May 13, 2024); EPA, Kaiser Aluminum Fabricated Products LLC Detailed Facility 
Report, ECHO, https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-facility-report?fid=110000341924 (last updated 
May 13, 2024); EPA, Quality Metal Finishing Detailed Facility Report, ECHO, 
https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-facility-report?fid=110041010526 (last updated May 13, 2024); 
 

21 
 
sources, EPA will view itself as under no obligation to assess or regulate the risks they pose. And 
it is unlikely to do so, given its past practices of failing to conduct risk reviews or address risks 
posed by area sources. Thus, the evidence demonstrates that EPA cannot rely on the prospect of 
future Clean Air Act rulemakings to address the risks posed by dozens of area sources. 
Second, beyond the legal differences between the Clean Air Act and TSCA, the practical 
realities of Clean Air Act implementation establish that potential future NESHAP rulemakings 
are insufficient to address the risk 1-BP poses to fenceline communities.  EPA’s claim in this 
proposal that it can address risks through future NESHAP rulemakings is further undermined by 
the fact that EPA may never again conduct another Clean Air Act risk review for many of the 
sources that EPA found present unreasonable risk.  And even if EPA does conduct such reviews, 
they are certain to be so delayed that future EPA action will not sufficiently reduce the risks as 
required by section 9(b).  Given these practical and legal realities, it is plainly in the public 
interest to regulate the risks to fenceline communities under TSCA. 
1.  
EPA unlawfully refuses to do section 112(f) risk reviews for source categories where it 
has previously completed a risk review, and many of the sources that present risk to fenceline 
communities have already been subject to a section 112(f) risk review. Therefore, it is entirely 
speculative that EPA will conduct additional section 112(f) reviews for those sources, let alone 
that such reviews would lead to regulations that eliminate the unreasonable risk presented.  
In a recent Clean Air Act rulemaking for coke ovens, EPA refused to do a new risk 
review for the source category, taking the position that it only has an obligation to conduct one 
risk review per source category and it had previously conducted a risk review for the source 
category in question.145  While this position is unlawful, if applied here, it would mean EPA 
would not issue health protective standards under section 112(f) for many of the sources of 1-BP 
 
EPA, Salzgitter Mannesmann Stainless Tubes Detailed Facility Report, ECHO, 
https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-facility-report?fid=110000901828 (last updated May 13, 2024); 
EPA, Spirit Aerosystems Inc. Detailed Facility Report, ECHO, https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-
facility-report?fid=110000446688 (last updated May 13, 2024); EPA, Superior Tube Collegeville 
FAC Detailed Facility Report, ECHO, https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-facility-
report?fid=110000337608 (last updated May 13, 2024);  
EPA, The Dow Chemical Co. Detailed Facility Report, ECHO, https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-
facility-report?fid=110000321474 (last updated May 13, 2024); EPA, The Dow Chemical 
Company U.S.A., Midland Detailed Facility Report, ECHO, https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-
facility-report?fid=110043787408 (last updated May 13, 2024); EPA, West Refinery Detailed 
Facility Report, ECHO, https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-facility-report?fid=110000504918(last 
updated May 13, 2024); EPA, Western Pneumatic Tube Company Detailed Facility Report, 
ECHO, https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-facility-report?fid=110000489221(last updated May 13, 
2024); EPA, Brush Wellman, Inc. Detailed Facility Report, ECHO, https://echo.epa.gov/detailed-
facility-report?fid=110000383184 (last updated May 13, 2024);  
145 EPA, Summary of Public Comments and Responses for Coke Ovens: Pushing, Quenching, 
and Battery Stacks Residual Risk and Technology Review, and Coke Oven Batteries Periodic 
Technology Review, Docket No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2002-0085 at 72 (May 2024), 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OAR-2002-0085-1603 (click “Download”).  

22 
 
that EPA has concluded present risk to fenceline communities.  For example, EPA found that 
dozens of vapor degreasing facilities present significant risk to fenceline communities.146  But 
EPA has already completed a section 112(f) risk review for the source category that covers these 
vapor degreasing facilities.147  Thus, EPA’s position in the Proposed Rule—that a Clean Air Act 
rulemaking to address risks posed by vapor degreasing is “required” in the future148 —is contrary 
to the position it takes in administering the Clean Air Act.  
2. 
Even if rules under section 112 of the Clean Air Act could eliminate unreasonable risk 
posed by 1-BP, EPA will not complete the necessary rulemakings in time to “sufficient[ly]” 
eliminate the risk.149  As used in section 9(b), “sufficient” means that EPA must use its other 
statutory authorities to eliminate the unreasonable risk in the timeframes mandated by section 
6(a).  For risk management measures short of a ban, those timeframes require EPA to establish 
effective dates that are “as soon as practicable” and compliance dates that “as soon as 
practicable, but not later than 5 years after the date of promulgation of the [risk management] 
rule.”150  
Yet, EPA’s administration of the section 112 program demonstrates that EPA will not, 
consistent with TSCA’s section 6(d) timeframes, complete section 112(f) rulemakings and set 
compliance deadlines for all of the source categories for which EPA found unreasonable risk.  
Under Clean Air Act section 112, EPA must complete periodic reviews of source category 
standards on eight-year cycles.151  But EPA consistently fails to meet the deadlines.  To take 
EPA’s example of the vapor degreasing NESHAP, EPA last set standards for the Halogenated 
Solvent Cleaning source category in 2007, meaning that EPA was required to complete a review 
of the source category by 2015.152  That review is already nine years overdue, and there is no 
indication that EPA has even begun the rulemaking, which will be a multi-year process to 
complete.  Section 112 rulemakings routinely languish for years; indeed, commenters are 
unaware of any recent section 112 review that EPA has completed in the timeframe mandated by 
the Clean Air Act.  Instead, in order to get EPA to complete section 112 rules, EPA typically has 
to be sued by community groups and be placed on a court-ordered deadline.153 Given that there 
are many types of facilities that exceed the TSCA risk benchmark for 1-BP, EPA would have to 
 
146 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 14–19. 
147 National Air Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Halogenated Solvent 
Cleaning, 72 Fed. Reg. 25,138 (May 3, 2007). 
148 Proposed Rule at 65,101. 
149 15 U.S.C. § 2608(b)(1). 
150 15 U.S.C. § 2605(d)(1). 
151 42 U.S.C. § 7412(d)(6), (f)(2). 
152 EPA, Halogenated Solvent Cleaning: National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air 
Pollutants (NESHAP), https://www.epa.gov/stationary-sources-air-pollution/halogenated-
solvent-cleaning-national-emission-standards-0 (last updated Jan.4, 2022).  
153 E.g., Blue Ridge Env’t Def. League v. Pruitt, 261 F. Supp. 3d 53 (D.D.C. 2017); Cmty. In-
Power & Dev. Ass’n v. Pruitt, 304 F. Supp. 3d 212 (D.D.C. 2018); see also Government 
Accountability Office, Clean Air Act: EPA Should Improve the Management of its Air Toxics 
Program (July 2006) (https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-06-669.pdf). 

23 
 
complete Clean Air Act rulemakings for multiple source categories to address the risk.  EPA 
lacks substantial evidence that it could complete such rulemakings in a sufficiently timely 
manner; indeed, the evidence demonstrates EPA is unlikely to do so. 
 
There is a significant mismatch between EPA’s regulatory authority under TSCA and its 
administration of section 112 of the Clean Air Act, which precludes EPA from determining that 
future Clean Air Act rulemakings are sufficient to mitigate the risk posed by 1-BP or in the 
public interest.  This mismatch means that in circumstances where TSCA requires regulation to 
fully eliminate unreasonable risk, the prospect of future regulations under the Clean Air Act are 
uncertain at best and likely to be significantly less stringent than what TSCA requires; indeed, 
this mismatch may mean that EPA never regulates 1-BP emissions to protect fenceline 
communities under the Clean Air Act.  Thus, the Clean Air Act is insufficient to reduce the risks 
posed by 1-BP and, alternatively, it is in the public interest to regulate 1-BP under TSCA to 
eliminate the risks to fenceline communities. 
Finally, irrespective of whether actions under the Clean Air Act are sufficient and in the 
public interest for purposes of section 9(b), simply pointing to the possibility that EPA may take 
action someday under the Clean Air Act does not fulfill TSCA’s mandate that EPA “shall use” 
its other authorities to protect against unreasonable risk.154 Take EPA’s example of future Clean 
Air Act regulation of vapor degreasing.  There is no commitment or guarantee that EPA will ever 
conduct another section 112(f)(2) review for the Halogenated Solvent Cleaning source category 
because EPA believes it is under no legal obligation to do so.  Even if EPA did such a review, 
there is no guarantee or commitment that EPA would regulate the source category to reduce the 
risks for either major sources or area sources below TSCA’s unreasonable risk benchmark 
because EPA believes it is under no legal obligation to do so.  Finally, given that the standard for 
the source category is already years overdue and that EPA routinely delays standard setting, 
there is no guarantee or commitment as to when EPA would even undertake such a rulemaking 
let alone that it would do so sufficiently quickly.  This is just one example, and it applies with 
equal force to the many industries that EPA found pose unreasonable risk to fenceline 
communities.  EPA cannot rely on the mere possibility of future actions that EPA believes to be 
discretionary to satisfy section 9(b)’s mandate to take action to protect against unreasonable risk. 
IV. 
EPA MUST REVISE ITS PROPOSAL TO ENSURE IT ELIMINATES 
UNREASONABLE RISKS 
The Proposed Rule violates TSCA’s core requirement to regulate 1-BP “to the extent 
necessary so that the chemical substance . . . no longer presents [unreasonable] risk” to human 
health.155  The rule fails to protect the health of communities who, according to EPA’s own 
assessment, experience unacceptable cancer risks from their exposures to 1-BP.  And it would 
permit 97% of 1-BP production and use to continue, despite finding that 1-BP, as a whole 
chemical, poses unreasonable risk. 
 
154 15 U.S.C. § 2608(b)(1). 
155 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a). 

24 
 
TSCA authorizes, and in this case requires, a fundamentally different risk management 
approach.  Instead of permitting all active uses of 1-BP to continue in perpetuity, without 
meaningful limits on environmental releases or fenceline community exposures, EPA should 
phase out as many uses of 1-BP as possible.  To the extent there are critical uses that cannot be 
replaced in the near term, EPA can extend the phase-out period or grant time-limited exceptions 
pursuant to TSCA section 6(g).156  And for as long as 1-BP is permitted to be used, EPA must 
require fenceline monitoring at facilities emitting 1-BP, as well as corrective action should 
monitoring show higher-than-acceptable emissions.  This approach would result in a more 
health-protective, equitable, and legally defensible rule. 
a. EPA Should Phase out Ongoing Uses of 1-BP to Address Risks Faced by 
Fenceline Communities 
EPA has broad authority to regulate 1-BP based on its 2020 risk evaluation and 2022 
revised risk determination, which found unreasonable risk from 1-BP as a “whole chemical.”157  
As EPA explained in its revised risk determination, “under TSCA section 6(a), EPA is not limited 
to regulating the specific activities found to drive unreasonable risk and may select from among 
a suite of risk management requirements in section 6(a).”158  A total prohibition on the uses of 1-
BP—or a near-total prohibition, as EPA considered as a second alternative regulatory action159—
would best comply with TSCA’s mandate to eliminate unreasonable risks in that it would address 
the risks faced by fenceline communities.  To the extent that such a prohibition would phase out 
“critical” uses of 1-BP, EPA could adopt time-limited exemptions for those uses for which there 
are no feasible safer alternatives.160 
Having found unreasonable risks from 1-BP as a whole, EPA “shall consider” the factors 
enumerated in TSCA section 6(c)(2) when deciding how to manage those risks.161  Those 
statutory considerations include “the effects of the chemical substance . . . on health,” “the 
magnitude of the exposure of human beings to the chemical substances,” “the likely effect of the 
rule on . . . public health,” and “the costs and benefits of the proposed and final regulatory action 
and of the 1 or more primary alternative regulatory action.”162  TSCA does not permit EPA to 
exclude any reasonably available information about the magnitude of a chemical’s exposures or 
its effects on human health and the environment from the section 6(c)(2) analysis merely because 
the information was not quantified in EPA’s risk evaluation.  To the contrary, EPA has an 
independent obligation to consider those 6(c)(2) factors during the risk management process, 
including regulatory costs, benefits, and other “nonrisk factors” that EPA is precluded from 
considering during the risk evaluation process.163  And where there is insufficient information to 
 
156 Id. § 2605(g). 
157 Revised Risk Determination at 19. 
158 Id. at 2. 
159 See Proposed Rule at 65,094–95. 
160 See 15 U.S.C. § 2605(g). 
161 Id. § 2605(c)(2)(A). 
162 Id. 
163 See id. § 2605(b)(4)(A) 

25 
 
conduct quantitative analyses of those factors, TSCA section 6(c)(2) allows EPA to consider and 
rely on qualitative assessments as well.164   
When conducting the required section 6(c)(2) analysis for the Proposed Rule, therefore, 
EPA must consider not only the exposures and effects that it quantified in the 1-BP risk 
evaluation but also those that it unlawfully excluded from that evaluation.  Thus, EPA’s 6(c)(2) 
analysis must account for 1-BP’s adverse effects on fenceline communities, as well as the 
neurological risks identified by OEHHA that EPA understated in its risk evaluation and failed to 
adequately address in its Proposed Rule.165  EPA’s analysis of “effects of the chemical substance 
. . . on health” and “the magnitude of . . . exposure” must meaningfully include impacts on 
fenceline communities,166 and EPA’s consideration of the “the costs and benefits” of different 
regulatory options must consider the benefits of 1-BP reductions for fenceline communities.167  
While EPA alluded to the risks faced by members of fenceline communities in its discussion of 
the factors it analyzed under TSCA section 6(c)(2),168 it appears to have considered these 
individuals only “as a factor when proposing to prohibit increased releases of 1-BP to outdoor 
air” that result from a facility’s workplace controls.169  Moreover, EPA’s Economic Analysis 
omits from consideration benefits to fenceline communities from reductions in 1-BP 
exposures.170  EPA’s limited consideration of the risks faced by fenceline communities for only 
one regulatory option is insufficient under TSCA, and EPA must consider how the second 
alternative regulatory option would benefit fenceline communities. 
 
EPA can remedy this flaw in its final rule.  TSCA requires EPA to “factor in” the section 
6(c)(2) considerations “to the extent practicable” when “selecting among prohibitions and other 
restrictions,”171 but it does not specify how EPA must weigh those considerations.  Based on its 
existing unreasonable risk determination, EPA is free to determine that a broad phase-out is the 
best way of eliminating 1-BP’s unreasonable risks and recognize that it would have the added 
benefit of addressing the risks faced by fenceline communities.  Unlike the Proposed Rule, that 
approach would eliminate the unreasonable risks that EPA identified in its risk evaluation, while 
also rendering the gaps and deficiencies in that evaluation harmless. 
In addition to satisfying TSCA’s obligations, a broader phase-out of 1-BP is consistent 
with EPA’s longstanding policy objectives.  As the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit 
 
164 Lab. Council for Latin Am. Advancement v. EPA, 12 F.4th 234, 250 (2d Cir. 2021) (upholding 
EPA ban on consumer uses of methylene chloride paint strippers based in part on EPA’s 
“qualitative assessments of the costs to retailers, distributors, and commercial end users” and 
stating that such assessments were “consistent with EPA’s obligation to consider ‘reasonably 
available information’”). 
165 See notes 44–45 supra and accompanying text. 
166 15 U.S.C. § 2605(c)(2)(A)(i). 
167 Id. § 2605(c)(2)(A)(iv)(II). 
168 Proposed Rule at 65,101–03. 
169 Proposed Rule at 65,098; see also id. at 65,103.  This risk-management option is insufficient 
to protect fenceline communities for the reasons explained in Part III, supra. 
170 See Economic Analysis at 8-1–8-22. 
171 15 U.S.C. § 2605(c)(2)(B). 

26 
 
recognized in upholding EPA’s 2019 ban of consumer uses of methylene chloride paint strippers, 
it is reasonable to expect that chemical phase-outs will promote the development and deployment 
of safer alternatives by “creat[ing] new business via alternative products and an evolving 
marketspace.”172  Upstream prohibitions are also “relatively easy to enforce because key 
requirements are directly placed on a small number of” manufacturers and suppliers, which 
“minimizes to the greatest extent the potential for [the chemical] to be intentionally or 
unintentionally misdirected into the prohibited uses.”173  EPA’s pollution prevention policies 
“make[] clear” that source reduction is EPA’s “preferred” strategy for reducing chemical risks.174  
Similarly, the hierarchy of controls that EPA endorses in the Proposed Rule prioritizes 
“elimination” and “substitution” as the most effective means of addressing occupational risks,175 
and these controls would have the additional co-benefit of reducing exposures to other groups, 
like fenceline communities. 
Industry has argued that prohibitions are not necessary to address uses of chemicals that 
can be managed through other, less restrictive means and are thus barred by TSCA’s requirement 
to regulate chemicals “to the extent necessary so that . . . [it] no longer presents [unreasonable] 
risk.”176  This argument misstates the facts and the law.  As explained above, a prohibition of 1-
BP would eliminate the chemical’s unreasonable risks to human health and the environment, 
while the Proposed Rule would not.  If any option is barred by section 6(a), it is the one that 
leaves unreasonable risks unaddressed. 
Industry’s interpretation of TSCA section 6(a) has been rejected by the sole court to 
consider it.  In 2019, the Halogenated Solvents Industry Alliance challenged EPA’s risk 
management rule banning consumer uses of methylene chloride paint strippers, claiming that 
rule was too broad, and thus in excess of what was necessary to protect consumers, because it 
swept in some commercial uses for which EPA had not made a finding of unreasonable risk.  The 
Second Circuit upheld EPA’s ban, explaining that the relevant inquiry under TSCA section 6(a) 
was not whether the rule impacted or restricted other uses but rather whether it was “a reasonable 
means, supported by substantial evidence, to ensure that the unreasonable risks of methylene 
 
172 Lab. Council for Latin Am. Advancement, 12 F.4th at 250–51. 
173 See Trichloroethylene; Regulation of Certain Uses Under TSCA § 6(a), 81 Fed. Reg. 91,592, 
91,607 (Dec.16, 2016). 
174 Carol M. Browner, Pollution Prevention Policy Statement, EPA (June 15, 1993), 
https://www.epa.gov/p2/pollution-prevention-policy-statement; see also 42 U.S.C. § 13101 
(establishing a “national policy of the United States that pollution should be prevented or 
reduced at the source whenever feasible”). 
175 Proposed Rule at 65,072. 
176 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a); see, e.g., Halogenated Solvents Indus. Alliance, Comments on Proposed 
Risk Management Rule for Methylene Chloride, Docket No. EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0465 at 1 
(July 3, 2023), https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0465-0285 (click 
“Download”); Am. Petroleum Inst., Comments on Proposed Risk Management Rule for 
Methylene Chloride, Docket No. EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0465 at 3 (June 29, 2023), 
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0465-0198 (click “Download”).  

27 
 
chloride paint removal products for consumer uses be ‘no longer present[ed].’”177  That is the 
appropriate standard for a risk management rule, and it is plainly satisfied by a prohibition of 
non-essential 1-BP uses.178 
b. EPA Should Require Fenceline Monitoring and Corrective Action  
Because the record demonstrates that there is unreasonable risk to fenceline communities 
from air emissions, EPA must issue a risk management rule that eliminates that risk.179 One 
option EPA must evaluate and should adopt is a fenceline monitoring and corrective action 
standard for any uses of 1-BP that cannot be phased out. 
Under such a standard, EPA would set an action level for the concentration of the 1-BP in 
the ambient air at which the chemical presents unreasonable risk to nearby communities.  
Facilities would then be required to set up air monitoring devices to measure ambient levels of 1-
BP at the perimeter of the facility—i.e., at the fenceline.  If the monitored levels of the 1-BP 
exceed the action level, the facility operator would be required to develop and implement a 
corrective action plan to reduce 1-BP emissions until the monitored levels of the pollutant come 
below the action level—i.e., until the unreasonable risk is eliminated. 
Such a standard is authorized under section 6(a).  Under its authority to “regulat[e] any 
manner or method of commercial use of such substance or mixture,”180 EPA may establish a 
fenceline monitoring and corrective action standard, just as it has utilized that authority to 
establish a WCPP, relying on an Existing Chemical Exposure Limit (“ECEL”).181  Additionally, 
EPA may establish such a standard utilizing its authority to “restrict[] the manufacturing[] [or] 
processing” of a chemical substance,182 or to require manufacturers and processors to “monitor 
or conduct tests which are reasonable and necessary to assure compliance” with other risk 
management measures.183  
Such a standard can be implemented here. EPA has already derived inhalation hazard 
values for 1-BP for both cancer and non-cancer endpoints.184 Based on those values, it can 
establish the exposure levels at which the chemical presents unreasonable risk for fenceline 
 
177 Lab. Council for Latin Am. Advancement, 12 F.4th at 251 (alteration in original) (quoting 15 
U.S.C. § 2605(a)). 
178 Cf. Emhart Indus. v. New England Container Co., 274 F. Supp. 3d 30, 58 (D.R.I. 2017) 
(holding that CERCLA requirement to “‘assess site conditions . . . to the extent necessary to 
select a remedy’” left EPA with “significant leeway to develop a remedial investigation and 
feasibility study process specific to a site” (quoting 40 C.F.R. § 300.430(a)(2)). 
179 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a). 
180 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a)(5); 
181 See EPA, Methylene Chloride; Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) 
EPA–HQ–OPPT–2020–0465: Response to Public Comments, Docket No. EPA–HQ–OPPT–
2020–0465 at 189 (Apr. 2024), https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-
0465-0424 (click “Download”). 
182 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a)(1). 
183 Id. § 2605(a)(4). 
184 2023 Fenceline Assessment at 4. 

28 
 
communities.  And there are readily applicable monitoring technologies.  As EPA recognizes, 1-
BP air concentrations can be accurately monitored at very low concentrations of less than 0.0005 
ppm.185  
Thus, EPA can use validated monitoring methods such as TO-17 to conduct fenceline 
monitoring, as EPA itself recognized in this rulemaking.186 In addition, there are other air 
monitoring methods—such as TO-15, TO-15a, and Method 320—that are used for ambient 
monitoring of other volatile organic compounds (“VOCs”) that EPA could readily validate and 
then apply to 1-BP.187  Finally, there are commercial monitors that are used to detect and 
speciate VOCs that could detect 1-BP in the ambient air.188 
Failure to consider a fenceline monitoring standard would be arbitrary in light of EPA’s 
commitment to implementing Next Generation Compliance methods and its successful use of 
fenceline monitoring to control ambient air pollution at the fenceline in other contexts. Over a 
decade ago, EPA established the Next Generation Compliance initiative to identify techniques to 
“revolutionize environmental protection.”189 One such technique was fenceline monitoring.190 
EPA recognized that there is an ongoing “revolution” in the use of monitoring to reduce the 
emissions of toxic air pollutants because “[m]onitoring devices are becoming more accurate, 
 
185 Proposed Rule at 65,082. 
186 Memorandum from Yvette Selby-Mohamadu, Branch Chief, Existing Chems. Risk 
Assessment Div., EPA to Joel Wolf, Branch Chief, Existing Chems. Risk Mgmt. Div., EPA Re: 
Existing Chemical Exposure Limit (ECEL) for Occupational Use of 1-Bromopropane (1-BP) at 5 
(Mar. 2, 2021). 
187 EPA, Compendium of Methods for the Determination of Toxic Organic Compounds in 
Ambient Air, Compendium Method TO-15 Determination of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) 
In Air Collected In Specially-Prepared Canisters and Analyzed By Gas Chromatography/ Mass 
Spectrometry (GC/MS) (Jan.1999), https://www3.epa.gov/ttnamti1/files/ambient/airtox/to-
15r.pdf; EPA, Method TO-15A: Determination of Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) in Air 
Collected in Specially Prepared Canisters and Analyzed by Gas Chromatography–Mass 
Spectrometry (GC-MS) (Sept. 2019), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2019-
12/documents/to-15a_vocs.pdf); EPA, Test Method 320—Measurement of Vapor Phase Organic 
and Inorganic Emissions by Extractive Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Spectroscopy (Jan. 
14, 2019), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2019-06/documents/method_320.pdf. 
188Air Logics Air Monitoring Systems, Industrial & Commercial Applications 
https://www.airlogicsllc.com/industrial-commercial (last visited Sept. 18, 2024); Air Logics Air 
Monitoring Systems, Air Quality Monitoring, https://www.airlogicsllc.com/airmonitoring (last 
visited Sept. 18, 2024) (describing field gas chromatograph technology for speciaiting and 
measuring VOCs).  
189 Cynthia Giles, Next Generation Compliance, The Environmental Forum at 22 (Oct. 2013) 
(attached as Exhibit E).  The author wrote the article in her capacity as the Assistant 
Administrator for EPA’s Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance. 
190 EPA, Compendium of Next Generation Compliance Examples in Clean Air Act Programs at 
12 (2016), https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-
09/documents/caanextgencomplcompendium.pdf.  

29 
 
more mobile, and cheaper.”191  Fenceline monitoring “help[s] [companies] quickly identify and 
fix problems, saving money[] [and] reducing  pollution.”192  Additionally, it lets companies and 
communities know about pollution problems early, so that “prompt action can be taken to fix 
problems before they become serious health concerns.”193  
EPA has begun to successfully implement fenceline monitoring in a number of rules to 
control emissions to ambient air at the community fenceline.  In 2015, EPA established a 
fenceline monitoring and corrective action standard for the Petroleum Refinery categories, the 
first-of-its-kind implemented under section 7412(d)(6) of the Clean Air Act.194 As EPA 
recognized in that rulemaking, fenceline monitoring would enable quicker and more effective 
reductions of fugitive emissions.195  That fenceline monitoring standard has been a major 
success, significantly reducing ambient fenceline concentrations.196  Since that rulemaking, EPA 
has also required fenceline monitoring and corrective action standards in a number of other 
industries in order to protect fenceline communities from toxic air pollution.197  
Thus, EPA recognizes that fenceline monitoring and corrective action are critically 
important tools for protecting fenceline communities from toxic air pollution.  It would be 
arbitrary and contrary to the substantial evidence that fenceline monitoring can address risks to 
communities from ambient air emissions for EPA not to adopt fenceline monitoring and 
corrective action as a risk management measure to control 1-BP emissions. 
Indeed, deploying fenceline monitors is all the more important in light of the fact that 
EPA has likely underestimated the emissions and ambient fenceline concentrations of 1-BP, and 
thus underestimated the risk these facilities pose.  In estimating risk posed by 1-BP, EPA 
primarily relied on TRI data, which in turn is based on self-reported emissions estimates by 1-BP 
 
191 Cynthia Giles, Next Generation Compliance, The Environmental Forum at 24. 
192 Id. 
193 Id. 
194 Petroleum Refinery Sector Risk and Technology Review and New Source Performance 
Standards, 80 Fed. Reg. 75,178, 75,182, 75,184 (Dec. 1, 2015). 
195 Petroleum Refinery Sector Risk and Technology Review and New Source Performance 
Standards, 79 Fed. Reg. 36,880, 36,923, 36,926 (June 30, 2014). 
196 Env’t Integrity Project, Cancer-Causing Benzene Pollution from U.S. Refineries Down 
Significantly (May 16, 2024), https://environmentalintegrity.org/news/cancer-causing-benzene-
pollution-from-u-s-refineries-down-significantly/.  
197 See e.g., National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Coke Ovens: Pushing, 
Quenching, and Battery Stacks, and Coke Oven Batteries; Residual Risk and Technology 
Review, and Periodic Technology Review, 89 Fed. Reg. 55,684, 55,695 (July 5, 2024); New 
Source Performance Standards for the Synthetic Organic Chemical Manufacturing Industry and 
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for the Synthetic Organic Chemical 
Manufacturing Industry and Group I & II Polymers and Resins Industry, 89 Fed. Reg. 42,932 
(May 16, 2024). 

30 
 
emitters, rather than monitoring data.198  Requiring fenceline monitoring has the potential to 
manage emissions and risks that EPA overlooked. 
As EPA has long recognized, monitoring often shows that companies “greatly 
underestimate[] their pollution, sometimes by an order of magnitude.”199  Thus, having “[a]ctual 
measurements, as opposed to estimates, often show far higher emissions than [EPA], or the 
company, thought.”200  Given that the vast majority of EPA’s estimates of 1-BP emissions are 
not based on monitors, there’s a significant likelihood that EPA’s current estimates of emissions 
and risks are too low.  Accordingly, requiring fenceline monitoring has the potential to be a 
particularly effective risk management technique here. 
Finally, even if EPA chooses other risk management measures to eliminate the risk 1-BP 
poses to fenceline communities, so long as EPA continues to allow the manufacture, processing, 
and commercial use of 1-BP, it should nonetheless require fenceline monitoring and corrective 
action as a complementary risk management measure.  As EPA has itself recognized, fenceline 
monitoring is an important tool for ensuring compliance with standards that are designed to 
reduce emissions.  In particular, fenceline monitoring enables companies to “identify ‘poor-
performing’ sources … using the fenceline monitoring data” and thereby take corrective action 
“before they would have otherwise been aware of the issue through existing inspection and 
enforcement measures.”201  
V. 
EPA SHOULD NOT INCLUDE A DE MINIMIS EXCEPTION TO ITS 1-BP 
PROHIBITIONS 
EPA solicits comments on “whether it should consider a de minimis level of 1–BP in 
formulations for certain continuing industrial and commercial uses to account for impurities 
(e.g., 0.1% or 0.5%) when finalizing these prohibitions, and, if so, what level should be 
considered de minimis.”202  EPA should not include any de minimis exception, which would be 
unsupported by the existing record and contrary to EPA’s obligations under TSCA. 
As described above, EPA’s overarching mandate under TSCA is to eliminate chemicals’ 
unreasonable risks.203  It makes no difference whether those risks are associated with the 
presence of the chemical as an impurity, a byproduct, or an intentional ingredient in a product or 
 
198 The TRI Form Rs show that only three of the facilities for which EPA found unreasonable 
risk—Mahle Engine Components, Elgiloy Specialty Metals, and Flint Hills Resources Corpus 
Christie West Plant—reported emissions based on monitored data. The remaining facilities relied 
on emissions factors, mass balance equations, or other emissions estimation methods.  
199 Cynthia Giles, Next Generation Compliance, The Environmental Forum at 24. 
200 Id. 
201 National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Coke Ovens: Pushing, 
Quenching, and Battery Stacks, and Coke Oven Batteries; Residual Risk and Technology 
Review, and Periodic Technology Review, 88 Fed. Reg. 55,858, 55,888 (Aug. 16, 2023); see also 
Cynthia Giles, Next Generation Compliance, The Environmental Forum at 24. 
202 Proposed Rule at 65,081. 
203 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a). 

31 
 
process;204 EPA “shall” regulate the chemical “to the extent necessary so that [it] no longer 
presents such risk.”205  Neither the 1-BP risk evaluation nor the risk management rule identify a 
threshold below which the presence of 1-BP in a product presents no unreasonable risk.  To the 
contrary, EPA found that 1-BP is highly toxic at low exposure levels and explained that “a single 
exposure during a critical window of development” can result in serious developmental harm.206  
The Proposed Rule floats two potential de minimis thresholds: 0.1% and 0.5%.207  To the best of 
our knowledge, EPA has not calculated the risks associated with 1-BP exposures at either of 
those levels. 
Moreover, even if EPA could identify a concentration at which the presence of 1-BP in a 
given product presents no unreasonable risk, a de minimis threshold would still be unlawful.  
When evaluating risks under TSCA, EPA must consider known, intended, and reasonably 
foreseen combinations of exposures from multiple products, pathways, and routes.208  Therefore, 
even if, say, EPA calculated no unreasonable risk from spot cleaners and stain removers 
containing 0.1% or less 1-BP, those exposures could still contribute to unreasonable risk when 
combined with 1-BP in other products (such as liquid or aerosol cleaners), in the environment, or 
in an occupational setting.  The Proposed Rule includes an ECEL of 0.5 ppm over an eight-hour 
time weighted average, which was calculated to keep workers’ cancer risks from 1-BP exposure 
risks below 1-in-10,000.209  But EPA did not account for any exposures workers face outside of 
the workplace when setting the ECEL.  Therefore, any additional exposure to 1-BP, even at so-
called “de minimis” levels, could leave workers exposed to unreasonable risk, in violation of 
TSCA. 
 
The de minimis thresholds included in prior risk management rules reinforce our 
concerns.  In its methylene chloride risk management rule, EPA allowed the continued 
production, sale, and use of otherwise prohibited products containing up to 0.1% methylene 
chloride by weight.210  EPA claimed that the presence of methylene chloride at that level “does 
not contribute to unreasonable risk under the conditions of use,”211 but EPA only analyzed the 
 
204 See EPA, 1,4-Dioxane Draft Revised Unreasonable Risk Determination at 22–23 (July 2023), 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-
07/Draft%20Revised%20Risk%20Determination%2014-Dioxane-2023.pdf (finding that 1,4-
dioxane as a byproduct contributed to unreasonable risk) (attached as Exhibit F). 
205 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a).  
206 2020 Risk Evaluation at 238; see also id. at 297. 
207 Proposed Rule at 65,081. 
208  See notes 69–72 supra and accompanying text.  
209 Proposed Rule at 65,082.  We continue to disagree with EPA’s use of a 1-in-10,000 cancer risk 
threshold for workers for the reasons set forth in prior comments.  See, e.g., EDF, Comments on 
Chemicals Review of Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane, Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2019-
0235-0001 at 88–90 (Oct. 11, 2019), https://www.regulations.gov/comment/EPA-HQ-OPPT-
2019-0235-0047.  
210 Methylene Chloride; Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), 89 Fed. 
Reg. 39,254, 39,268 (May 8, 2024).  
211 Id.  

32 
 
risks associated with that “de minimis” weight fraction for a single condition of use (aerosol 
degreasing).212  Aerosol degreasing is not even the highest risk use of methylene chloride; 
instead, it was selected because it was “the only exposure scenario for which weight fraction 
could be varied” in EPA’s model.213  Therefore, EPA’s analysis does not ensure that a 0.1% 
weight fraction would prevent unreasonable risks from all of methylene chloride’s conditions of 
use, much less from combinations of such uses. 
 
EPA’s other defenses of a de minimis threshold are no more availing.  In its methylene 
chloride rule, EPA states that the “[t]he OSHA Hazard Communication Standard . . . indicates 
that a substance is considered a health hazard if it includes greater than 0.1% of a . . . 
carcinogen,” and that “other EPA programs, such as the Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) program, 
have adopted a de minimis threshold of 0.1% for chemicals which are defined as carcinogens or 
as a potential carcinogen.”214  Setting aside the questionable legality of the TRI de minimis 
exemption,215 neither the Occupational Safety and Health Act nor the Emergency Planning and 
Community Right-to-Know Act mandate the elimination of unreasonable risks to potentially 
exposed or susceptible subpopulations, and those thresholds were not set with TSCA’s mandate 
in mind.  They have no bearing on whether EPA can or should establish a de minimis threshold 
for 1-BP under TSCA. 
* 
* 
* 
 
EPA’s Proposed Rule represents a missed opportunity to address the risks facing 
communities surrounding facilities that emit carcinogenic 1-BP.  While we support the limited 
ways that the Proposed Rule will reduce emissions of 1-BP—including by banning certain uses 
of the chemical—the rule falls far short of what is mandated under TSCA and would leave 
fenceline communities exposed to unsafe levels of 1-BP.  EPA has the authority to strengthen its 
risk management approach to 1-BP by phasing out the use of the chemical and mandating 
emissions monitoring and reductions while 1-BP is still in use.  TSCA requires that it do so. 
 
If you have any questions about these comments, please contact Kelly Lester and Tosh 
Sagar at Earthjustice (klester@earthjustice.org and tsagar@earthjustice.org). 
 
 
 
 
212 See Memorandum from Yvette Selby-Mohamadu, Branch Chief, Existing Chems. Risk 
Assessment Div., EPA to Joel Wolf, Branch Chief, Existing Chems. Risk Mgmt. Div., EPA Re: 
Additional Worker and Consumer Risk Analyses in Support of the 2023 Proposed Regulation of 
Methylene Chloride under TSCA Section 6(a) (Aug. 14, 2023), 
https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0465-0389/content.pdf (attached as 
Exhibit G). 
213 Id. at 1. 
214 89 Fed. Reg. at 39,268. 
215 See Am. Compl. ¶¶ 75–80, Nat’l PFAS Contamination Coalition v. EPA, No. 22-cv-00132 
(D.D.C. Nov. 4, 2022), ECF No. 21 (attached as Exhibit H). 

33 
 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
Center for Environmental Health 
 
Earthjustice  
GASP 
Natural Resources Defense Council

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0127 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
September 4, 2024 
 
Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
United States Environmental Protection Agency 
 
Comments to the EPA on the Proposed Rule for 1-Bromopropane 
Agency/Docket Numbers: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471; FRL-8156-01-OCSPP 
RIN: 2070-AK73 
 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
Brittany Carroll, a practicing Industrial Hygienist who evaluates workplace and worker 
exposures to chemical and physical hazards, appreciates the opportunity to provide 
feedback on the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed rule on 1-
Bromopropane (1-BP). I hope you find this feedback useful and am happy to answer any 
questions you may have. The questions I have provided responses to (below) relate to my 
professional expertise; all other questions did not pertain to Industrial Hygiene-related 
issues. 
 
 
1. EPA is requesting public comment on all elements of the proposed regulatory 
action and the alternative regulatory actions. 
In the “Other monitoring requirements” section I do not agree with the proposed 
requirement to “…require owners and operators to re-monitor within 15 working days after 
receipt of results of any exposure monitoring when results indicate non-detect or air 
monitoring equipment malfunction, unless an Environmental Professional as defined at 40 
CFR 312.10 or a Certified Industrial Hygienist reviews the monitoring results and 
determines re-monitoring is not necessary.” 
 
First, I do not agree with the re-monitoring requirement because it does not make technical 
sense to re-sample a process that has been demonstrated to be well-controlled through 
valid data collection (i.e., a non-detect result which is below the ECEL Action Level). 
Similarly, the rationale to establish a regulated area where a non-detection result has been 
collected does not make technical sense if the result proves that an exposure is well-

controlled. However, if a non-detection result is due to not enough air volume collection 
whereas the non-detection result exceeds the ECEL (for example, a laboratory result: <0.1 
ppm), then re-monitoring should be required. This needs to be clarified in the final 
regulation to prevent excessive personal monitoring for processes that are well-controlled. 
 
Second, I disagree with the proposed requirement to re-monitor within 15 working days. I 
disagree with this proposed requirement because it may be exceedingly difficult to 
coordinate a sample event so quickly. Many businesses (especially smaller industry 
businesses) do not have an industrial hygienist on-site. Often, small businesses may have a 
safety professional on staff, but this person may or may not be qualified to perform 
exposure monitoring. In these instances, these businesses have to locate a contractor, 
negotiate pricing, establish a contract, schedule an on-site visit, etc. Typically, a visit such as 
this is negotiated to be a one-time visit with specifically budgeted hours. If the contractor 
has to return to re-sample it is unlikely that sampling event can be scheduled in such a 
tight deadline either due to scheduling constraints, budgeting issues (having to issue a 
change order), or not being aware that the re-sample event is required by TSCA regulation. 
In the case where a non-detect result exceeds the ECEL, re-monitoring should be required. 
However, the timeline has to be more lenient. I would recommend allowing 30-60 days 
following the initial event. Additionally, it should be considered that in some operations it 
may be unlikely to re-monitor if the specific task that involved 1-BP is very infrequent and 
does not occur in the timeline proposed in the regulation (i.e., only conducted quarterly or 
biannually or annually).  
 
Third, if air monitoring equipment malfunctions during sampling and air volume collected 
cannot be determined, the technical procedure for sample handling is to void that specific 
sample and not send it for laboratory analysis. If air monitoring equipment malfunctions, 
but the air volume can be determined and it is sufficient volume to collect a result below 
the ECEL Action Level, that sample may be saved and sent to laboratory analysis. 
 
9.  EPA is soliciting comment regarding an ECEL action level that is lower than the 
ECEL and any associated provisions related to the ECEL action level. 
I agree with having an action level established for inhalation exposures, similar to OSHA 
chemical-specific standards (i.e., vinyl chloride, formaldehyde, hexavalent chromium, 
benzene, etc.). However, compliance to monitor to the ECEL action level may be difficult. 
Currently the only feasible method to monitor to such a low compliance limit is via a small 
charcoal tube (passive monitoring badges do not have a high enough air uptake rate). 
Using a small charcoal tube, 1-BP can be detected down to 20% of the proposed ECEL over 
a full 8-hour workshift. Unfortunately, cheaper and easier-to-use passive badges are 
unable to detect to a low enough air concentration over the same sampling period. Thus, 
due to the extremely low ECEL action level, options for exposure monitoring are severely 
restricted. 
 

10. EPA requests comment on the feasibility of complying with and monitoring for 
an ECEL of 0.05 ppm and an ECEL action level of 0.03 ppm, including occupational 
exposure monitoring and associated analytical methods. In particular, EPA 
requests comment on changes that may be needed in order to meet such a 
standard, for example changes related to elimination or substitution of 1–BP, 
engineering controls, process changes, or monitoring frequency. EPA is also 
interested in the information on the availability of laboratory capacity needed to 
meet the proposed standard, and the costs associated with such testing.  
It is currently feasible to perform employee personal exposure monitoring to comply with 
the ECEL of 0.05 ppm. Utilizing a small charcoal tube (such as SKC 226-01 media) with a 
detection limit of 2.7 micrograms and a flow rate of 0.2 liters per minute, down to 20% of 
the ECEL can be detected on the sample media over the course of a work shift. However, it 
would not be possible to detect 10% of the ECEL over an 8-hour work shift, as the time 
required would exceed 480 minutes. The method described above is NIOSH 
1500/1501(GC). 
 
Notably, Industrial Hygiene professionals often use 10% of the occupational exposure limit 
(OEL) as an important risk-ranking criteria to professionally judge if an exposure is “well 
controlled.” If IHs are unable to establish if a sampling result is specifically <10% the OEL 
with the proposed sampling method, it will become more difficult for IHs (and other safety 
professionals) to provide certainty in their professional evaluations.   
 
11. EPA is soliciting comments regarding the timing of the initial exposure 
monitoring so that it would be representative of all tasks involving 1– BP where 
exposures may approach the ECEL. 
The timelines proposed for initial exposure monitoring seem to be reasonable for industry 
and federal agencies/contractors working on behalf of a federal agency. However, I am 
concerned about wide publication to industry alerting them of these regulations under 
TSCA. If industry/small businesses are unaware of workplace exposure limits and 
requirements via TSCA regulations (as opposed to OSHA), then they are unlikely to meet 
the required timelines for initial exposure monitoring and subsequent requirements 
established by TSCA regulations.  
 
12. EPA requests comment on the timeframes for periodic monitoring outlined in 
Table 1 of Unit IV.A.2. 
The timelines proposed for periodic monitoring are reasonable and appropriate, in my 
opinion, due to the similarity with the OSHA hexavalent chromium standard. However, I 
disagree with the proposed requirement “if the most recent (non-initial) exposure 
monitoring indicates that airborne exposure is below the ECEL action level, the owner or 
operator must repeat such monitoring within 6 months of the most recent monitoring until 
two consecutive monitoring measurements, taken at least seven days apart, are below the 
ECEL action level (<0.03 ppb 8-hour TWA), at which time the owner or operator must repeat 
the periodic exposure monitoring at least once every 5 years.”  

 
Firstly, the 0.03 ppb needs to be corrected to 0.03 ppm. Secondly, I believe the requirement 
should only require one additional sample taken within 6 months. The reasoning for this is 
because it is already confirmed that the sample is below the ECEL action level. One 
additional sample is sufficient to re-confirm that the operation is not exposing employees 
to 1-BP. 
 
Additionally, there appears to be a typographical error in the periodic monitoring section – 
“If the most recent exposure monitoring indicates that airborne exposure is at or above the 
ECEL action level (≥0.03 ppm 8-hour TWA) but at or below the ECEL (≤0.05 ppb 8-hour TWA), 
the owner or operator must repeat the periodic exposure monitoring within 6 months of 
the most recent exposure monitoring.” The “≤0.05 ppb” needs to be corrected to “≤0.05 
ppm”. 
 
13. EPA requests comment on workplace monitoring for implementation of an 
ECEL. EPA is soliciting information related to the frequency of monitoring, initial 
monitoring, and periodic monitoring that would be needed to demonstrate 
workplace exposure levels. Specifically, when this may impact the frequency of 
periodic monitoring where initial monitoring shows that employee exposures are 
above the level that would initiate requirements for compliance with the ECEL. 
The proposed requirements are appropriate, the only edit would be the one suggested in 
the answer to Question 12 above. 
 
14. EPA is requesting comment on the proposed timeframe of within 30 days to 
conduct additional exposure monitoring after there has been a change in the 
production, process, control equipment, personnel or work practices that may 
reasonably be expected to result in new or additional exposures at or above the 
ECEL action level, or when the owner or operator has any reason to believe that 
new or additional exposures at or above the ECEL action level have occurred.  
EPA should consider lengthening the proposed timeframe to conduct additional exposure 
monitoring following a change in production, process, control equipment, personnel or 
work practices to 45 – 60 days. The reasoning for lengthening the timeframe is because a 
majority of businesses do not have staff on-site who are capable of performing industrial 
hygiene exposure monitoring. These businesses have to locate a contractor, negotiate 
pricing, establish a contract, schedule an on-site visit, etc. This process is lengthy, so a 
longer grace period would be appreciated. 
 
17. EPA is soliciting comment on requiring warning signs to demarcate regulated 
areas, such as the requirements found in OSHA’s General Industry Standard for 
Beryllium. 
The proposed requirement to require warning signs to demarcate 1-BP regulated areas, 
similar to OSHA’s General Industry Standard for Beryllium is appropriate. However, like 
OSHA’s General Industry Standard for Beryllium, EPA should provide language in the final 

regulation that it would require to be posted on the signage. Below is the sign specification 
that OSHA requires for Beryllium:  
 
1910.1024(m)(2)(ii)(B)  
The employer must ensure each warning sign required by paragraph (m)(2)(i) of this standard 
bears the following legend: 
DANGER 
REGULATED AREA 
BERYLLIUM 
MAY CAUSE CANCER 
CAUSES DAMAGE TO LUNGS 
AUTHORIZED PERSONNEL ONLY 
WEAR RESPIRATORY PROTECTION AND PERSONAL PROTECTIVE CLOTHING AND 
EQUIPMENT IN THIS AREA 
 
18. EPA is requesting comment on whether there should be a requirement to 
replace cartridges or canisters after a certain number of hours, such as the 
requirements found in OSHA’s General Industry Standard for 1,3-Butadiene, or 
a requirement for a minimum service life of non-powered air-purifying 
respirators such as the requirements found in OSHA’s General Industry Standard 
for Benzene. 
The EPA could feasibly establish a requirement for respirator cartridge change-out 
schedule similar to the OSHA General Industry Standard for 1,3-Butadiene and use the 
ECEL as the comparison tool and a multiplication factor. However, research would be 
needed to determine if the respirator cartridge change-out requirements are satisfactory 
(too lenient where an individual is not protected from 1-BP by using an expired cartridge, 
or too conservative where cartridges are being changed too frequently and creating 
additional waste). The development of a 1-BP service life indicator for cartridges would be 
preferred, due to the visual component of seeing when a cartridge needs to be changed 
out, instead of having to keep track of the amount of time a cartridge has been used. 
 
19. EPA is requesting comment on how owners and operators can engage with 
potentially exposed persons on the development and implementation of an 
exposure control plan and PPE program. EPA is also requesting comment on 
whether EPA should include designated representatives who can also be 

permitted to observe exposure monitoring and have regular access to exposure-
related information at the request of potentially exposed persons. 
Owners and operators can engage with potentially exposed persons to develop exposure 
control plans by collecting and documenting the information with the potentially exposed 
group that is performing the work.  
 
At my place of work, we are considering requiring the people who handle and perform 
work with Methylene Chloride to document their exposure control plans themselves in 
conjunction with safety personnel (i.e., an Industrial Hygienist). That way the process is 
documented by the expert(s) of the process. Our PPE program is already established and 
documented previous to TSCA regulations. 
 
20. EPA requests comment relative to the ability of owners or operators to 
conduct initial monitoring within the timeframes identified in this proposed rule, 
and anticipated timelines for any procedural adjustments needed to 
comply with the requirements in this proposed rule, including establishment of a 
respiratory protection program and development of an exposure control plan. 
The proposed timelines are appropriate to conduct initial monitoring outlined in the 
proposed rule. However, I work at a company that has many industrial hygiene staff and an 
already established respiratory program. 
 
21. EPA also requests comment on whether additional time is needed to 
implement all aspects of the WCPP or if there are available substitutes for these 
applications. 
Additional time is not needed to implement a WCPP for my place of work due to it being a 
federal contractor working on behalf of a federal agency. I believe 3 years is sufficient in 
order to establish the additional elements of chemical control that will be required. 
 
22. EPA is soliciting comments on the requirements proposed for appropriate PPE 
selection. In addition, EPA understands that some workplaces rinse and reuse PPE 
after minimal use and is therefore soliciting comments on the impact on 
effectiveness of rinsing and reusing certain types of PPE, either gloves or 
protective clothing and gear. EPA also requests comment on the degree to which 
additional guidance related to use of PPE might be appropriate. 
The EPA is proposing to require the use of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) or multiple-layer laminate 
glove materials. However, it is unclear if the use of these specific glove materials is required 
for the listed occupational uses [manufacturing (import), processing as a reactant, 
processing as incorporation into articles, processing by repackaging, recycling, and 
disposal], or if the glove requirements are for all those potentially exposed persons via the 
dermal route. This requirement needs further clarification. 
 
As an industrial hygienist who makes glove requirements/recommendations, I believe 
leaving this decision for PPE should be left up to a trained safety personnel. While PVA and 

multiple-layer laminate gloves can withstand exposure to 1-BP for 480 minutes according 
to testing, this amount of chemical resistance is not necessary for all applications/uses of 1-
BP. Working in academia or in a research and development setting, most contact with 
chemicals is incidental and brief. Over prescription of a glove material that reduces 
dexterity may make certain activities more hazardous. Prescribing a less chemically-
resistant glove is a benefit in certain situations where contact is not expected to be more 
than incidental or due to an accident (i.e. very unlikely to occur). 
 
Additionally, the rinse and reuse of PPE is not encouraged. PPE is one-time use, especially 
in instances where the PPE has been exposed to a chemical. PPE can and does degrade 
over time. 
 
The EPA should provide general guidance for PPE use; specific PPE evaluations should be 
conducted by trained and qualified safety professionals given that not all workplaces are 
the same, handle chemicals in the same way or manner, or have the same work practices 
and procedures. Further, as PPE research evolves, initial requirements made by the EPA 
may become outdated (e.g., another material provides adequate or excellent protection at 
a fraction of the cost). 
 
26. EPA requests comment on the primary alternative regulatory action (a 
combination of prohibitions, requirements for a WCPP, prescriptive controls, self-
certification, and glove use) and whether any elements of this primary 
alternative regulatory action described in this proposed rule should be 
considered as EPA develops the final regulatory action. In particular, EPA is 
soliciting comment on prescribing specific engineering or administrative controls 
that would reduce inhalation exposures enough to address the unreasonable risk 
across all workplaces engaged in a condition of use. EPA also requests comment 
on any advantages or drawbacks for the timelines outlined in Unit IV.B. compared 
to the timelines identified for the proposed regulatory action in Unit IV.A. 
The EPA prescribing specific engineering and/or administrative controls may contribute 
positively in compliance as industries and especially small businesses have a better idea of 
how to comply with TSCA regulation when engaging in regulated processes. However, if the 
controls being prescribed are exceptionally burdensome, this may lead to businesses being 
forced to shut down. It may be better to suggest or highly encourage the use of certain 
controls, but to allow for a certain amount of professional judgement as long as personal 
exposures remain below the ECEL or Action Level. 
 
The timeline proposed in the primary alternative regulation would be preferred by industry 
because they may also be subject to other TSCA regulations. Industry having to work to 
comply with multiple new regulations simultaneously can become overburdensome 
enough where compliance isn’t feasible. In most cases, there are limited safety personnel 
in industry sectors, and working to establish multiple new programs at once can be a 

struggle. Longer compliance timelines are always appreciated when new regulations are 
implemented. 
 
35. EPA is requesting comment on specific controls that would mitigate the 
unreasonable risk from 1–BP and that could be included as part of a prescriptive 
workplace controls requirement, which could be considered as EPA develops the 
final regulatory action. Specifically, EPA is soliciting comment on combinations of 
specific engineering controls, administrative controls, and PPE that would reduce 
inhalation exposures to at or below the ECEL of 0.05 ppm as an 8-hour TWA for all 
workplaces where such controls would be required. EPA also is soliciting 
comment on the extent to which such requirements could reduce inhalation 
exposures to at or below the ECEL of 0.05 ppm as an 8-hour TWA. EPA is 
requesting comment on the compliance timeframe needed to implement 
engineering controls, administrative controls, and PPE that reduce inhalation 
exposures to at below the ECEL of 0.05 ppm as an 8- hour TWA for all regulated 
entities. Additionally, EPA is requesting any existing monitoring data that could 
inform whether a WCPP or prescriptive controls with a PPE program is a more 
appropriate regulatory action for industrial and commercial use of 1–BP in batch 
vapor degreasing. 
It is difficult to recommend specific controls for general operations that could be widely 
applicable or used due to each workplace having different processes, work practices, 
operational set-ups, etc. If a process can be enclosed or contained, that is typically the 
preferred engineering control recommended by IH.  
 
If work operations are/were able to be conducted remotely, this is another a great 
engineering control. However, not all businesses have the budget to be able to implement 
such costly controls and remain operational. 
 
A suggestion for a potential administrative control is to recommend for processes to be 
performed unattended (if possible); this typically entails starting a work process at the end 
of a workshift and letting it operate overnight or over the weekend. However, this is not 
going to be possible in all/many situations as processes are often required to be attended 
or monitored.  
 
If a business is pursuing implementing a new Industrial Hygiene control that completely 
changes a work process, the implementation timeline of such control could range up to a 
year or more. Engineering control implementation requires input from engineers, 
budgeting, safety personnel, in addition to the actual installation of the control, 
commissioning of the control, etc. All of these steps can be very time and budget 
consuming. This is also true of administrative controls such as developing trainings and 
new procedural documents. PPE is generally the easiest control to implement.  
 

42. EPA requests comment on whether owners and operators should be required 
to attest to whether and why the exposure controls they have selected would not 
result in increased releases of 1–BP to ambient air from the workplace, and keep 
records of that statement as part of the WCPP exposure control plan. 
An attestation statement regarding whether and why exposure controls selected would not 
result in increased releases of 1-BP to ambient air from the workplace does not seem 
especially effective as it is likely to be viewed as  an unnecessary add-on to administrative 
burden by stakeholders. It would be more effective to require environmental air (emission) 
data that proves 1-BP is not being released to ambient air from outside of local exhaust 
stacks. 
 
If you have any questions about my comments on EPA’s proposed rule on NMP, please 
contact me at carrollbm96@outlook.com. Thank you for your time and consideration. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Brittany Carroll, MPH 
Industrial Hygienist

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0146 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
September 23, 2024 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Attention: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
The Honorable Michal I. Freedhoff, Ph.D. 
Assistant Administrator 
Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
RE:  
1-Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA); 89 Fed. 
Reg. 65,066 (August 8, 2024).  
 
Dear Dr. Freedhoff: 
The Alliance for Chemical Distribution (ACD) submits the following comments in response to the 
proposed risk management actions published by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in the 
August 8, 2024, Federal Register regarding Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471, 89 Fed. Reg. 65,066, 
titled, “1-Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA).” We 
appreciate this opportunity to comment. 
About ACD 
The Alliance for Chemical Distribution supports and champions the chemical distribution experts the 
world depends on to safely, reliably, responsibly, and sustainably move the chemical products essential 
to our daily lives. ACD’s more than 400 chemical distribution industry members are primarily small, 
multi-generational family-owned businesses. They provide critical chemical products used in medicine 
and health care, food and agriculture, clean water and sanitation, energy production, electronics, 
communication, and more to over 750,000 end users.  
As leaders of the over $27 billion chemical distribution industry, ACD member companies have the 
extensive expertise, commitment to safety and sustainability, and access to a deep well of resources 
needed to ensure chemicals are moved safely and responsibly when and where they are needed. ACD 
owners and operators have a personal stake in the health, safety, and security of their employees, 
companies, and communities. They demonstrate their commitment through strict adherence to the 
highest standards in quality, safety, sustainability, and performance through compliance with ACD 
Responsible DistributionTM.  
The comprehensive Code of Management Practice, a condition of Responsible Distribution, requires 
each member company to have an active program designed to continuously improve safety and reduce 
incidents. This dedication, in addition to relationships with employees, involvement in local 

 
 
communities, including participation in Local Emergency Planning Committees, and careful compliance 
with numerous regulations on the federal, state, and local levels, empowers ACD members to navigate 
the ever-changing complexities of moving essential chemicals around the nation and the globe. 
ACD worked closely with Congress for over a decade to revise the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) 
and supported the passage of the Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act (LCSA). 
ACD remains engaged in implementing the LCSA and has submitted comments to the EPA on several of 
the Agency’s proposed rules under the new TSCA.  
ACD shares the EPA’s goals of eliminating the unreasonable risk of exposure to toxic chemicals, practicing 
environmental and product stewardship, providing the public with meaningful information about 
exposure risks, preventing chemical accidents, improving preparedness, and safeguarding public health. 
Additionally, ACD appreciates the agency’s hard work completing the required risk management rules 
consistent with the Lautenberg Amendments to TSCA. Though these efforts will protect workers and the 
public from risks to their health and safety, they must be built upon the best available science, informed 
by current industrial practices, and informed with input from all stakeholders. It is with these goals and 
efforts in mind that ACD urges the EPA to allow for the continued responsible manufacture, import, 
distribution, and use of 1-bromopropane (1-BP) in all industrial settings.  
EPA Should Utilize Workplace Chemical Protection Programs (WCPP) and Prescriptive Controls 
ACD was pleased that the EPA has proposed to allow the continued use (including manufacture, import, 
and distribution) of 1-BP in most industrial settings when there are prescriptive controls and/or 
workplace controls to mitigate exposures. ACD believes that the EPA’s decision to permit the use of 1-BP 
in these scenarios is justified, considering the low level of risk 1-BP poses to employees in these 
circumstances.  
For this reason, ACD urges the EPA to reconsider its proposed ban on certain industrial uses and instead 
require WCPPs for all industrial uses. The prescriptive requirements necessary to establish a WCPP that 
meets the requirements outlined in this rule would effectively prevent unreasonable exposure risks to 1-
BP. Additionally, ACD recommends that the EPA implement more reasonable exposure levels.  
The Small Business Advocacy Review (SBAR) panel report includes similar opinions. First, the EPA 
reported that small entity representatives (SER) “did not think 1-BP should be used in consumer and 
small-scale commercial products.”  Furthermore, one SER “described how, as required by the 
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and other regulatory entities, formulators use 
various techniques such as shipping labels; Globally Harmonized System (GHS) information; [personal 
protective equipment] PPE (including respirators and dermal protection); engineering controls; 
ventilation systems; and enclosed mixing systems” to manage any exposure risks of 1-BP. Additionally, 
several times, SERs described in detail the investments they and their customers have made in exposure 
reduction technologies. They also expressed concerns about being able to achieve the proposed 0.05 
ppm existing chemical exposure limit (ECEL). One SER stated that “a requirement to meet the ECEL 
would be a de facto ban on [the] use of 1-BP by small businesses and other vapor degreasing operations 

 
 
for many critical applications in the surface finishing industry, which could lead facilities to choose a 
substitute chemical with health or environmental risks.”1 
ACD was pleased to see that the EPA considered the SERs’ feedback and allowed for the continued use of 
1-BP in vapor degreasing applications. Facility owners and operators are capable of incorporating WCPPs 
that have the controls necessary to ensure there is no unreasonable risk to exposure of 1-BP to 
employees, effectively ensuring no unreasonable risks are occurring in their operations. For this reason, 
ACD believes it is reasonable to instead require WCPPs for all industrial uses and an achievable ECEL that 
is based on the best available science and weight of scientific evidence. 
Lack of Adequate Alternatives 
The EPA lacks comprehensive hazard data for alternatives even though the agency is proposing to ban 
conditions of use (COUs). The lack of data potentially puts users at risk of unknown or even more 
significant hazards without required workplace protections. Instead of prohibiting COUs, the EPA should 
require WCPPs that protect users. Again, similar concerns were raised during the SBAR, with one SER 
that “described [the need for] consideration for substitute chemicals or processes, including efficacy and 
safety concerns associated with the use of alternative chemicals.”2 
For example, the EPA included 227 products in the alternatives assessment for industrial and commercial 
use in adhesive chemical – spray adhesive for foam cushion manufacturing and other uses. In the 227 
alternative products evaluated, the EPA only found 165 unique chemical substances with associated 
Chemical Abstract Service Registry Numbers (CASRNs). Of those unique chemicals, reasonably available 
hazard information is available for 64 percent, and only 42 percent have at least one authoritative data 
source. Moreover, 39 percent of those chemicals are flammable. In the assessment for this COU, the EPA 
identified acetone, dimethyl ether, and methylene chloride as the most common chemical ingredients.3 
It should be noted that methylene chloride underwent its final risk management rulemaking under TSCA 
earlier this year. While the final rule was less stringent than initially proposed, it still places significant 
restraints on the supply chain, and affected entities are working to comply with the separate 
requirements of this regulation. 
ACD is concerned that if the EPA severely restricts the use of 1-BP through unachievable exposure levels, 
stakeholders will turn to alternatives with unknown and potentially worse hazards. The EPA must require 
WCPPs instead of prohibitions due to the absence of adequate and safe alternatives. ACD member 
companies and SERs have reported that identifying and adopting alternatives for 1-BP is not always 
practicable. In the EPA’s Final SBAR Report, the EPA summarizes that “[d]uring the Pre-Panel and Panel 
outreach meetings, as well as in SER comments, SERs noted the benefits to their business of using 1-BP 
and their concerns with potential substitutes and alternative methods such as aqueous cleaning. SERs 
 
1                     Small Business Advocacy Review. “Final Report of the Small Business Advocacy Review Panel on EPA’s Planned Proposed Rule for 1-
Bromopropane (1-BP).” SBAR. December 16, 2021. https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0066. 
2  
Ibid. 
3  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. “Alternatives Assessment for Use of 1-Bromopropane.” EPA. December 1, 2023. 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0063.  

 
 
cited various chemical and economic properties that make 1-BP a good choice, including low 
flammability and low cost.” The SERs also noted that 1-BP uses less energy than certain alternatives. 4 
Inhalation Exposure and EPA’s ECEL 
For inhalation exposures to workers, EPA derived an ECEL of 0.05 ppm based on the incidence of 
alveolar/bronchiolar adenoma or carcinoma (combined) in female B6C3F1 mice from a two-year 
inhalation toxicity study in mice and rats performed by the U.S. National Toxicology Program (NTP).5,6 In 
those studies, NTP concluded the following:7 
 
Under the conditions of these 2-year inhalation studies, there was some 
evidence of carcinogenic activity [asterisk omitted] of 1-bromopropane 
in male F344/N rats based on the occurrence of rare adenomas of the 
large intestine and increased incidences of epithelial neoplasms of the 
skin (keratoacanthoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and basal cell 
neoplasms). Increased incidences of malignant mesothelioma and 
pancreatic islet adenoma and carcinoma (combined) may also have 
been related to 1-bromopropane exposure. There was clear evidence of 
carcinogenic activity of 1-bromopropane in female F344/N rats based on 
increased incidences of adenoma of the large intestine. Increased 
incidences of skin neoplasms may also have been related to 1-
bromopropane exposure. There was no evidence of carcinogenic activity 
of 1-bromopropane in male B6C3F1 mice exposed to concentrations of 
62.5, 125, or 250 ppm 1-bromopropane. There was clear evidence of 
carcinogenic activity of 1-bromopropane in female B6C3F1 mice based 
on increased incidences of alveolar/bronchiolar neoplasms. 
EPA did not, however, perform a framework analysis of the carcinogenic mode of action for the identified 
tumors, per its 2005 “Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment” (the 2005 Guidelines) and as required 
under TSCA Sections 26(h)-(i).8 Instead, EPA provided an approximate one-page narrative on the 
“Possible Mode of Action for 1-BP Toxicity” in the final risk evaluation for 1-BP.9 Though beyond the scope 
of these comments, ACD notes some obvious conclusions from the NTP report. For example, there was 
some evidence and clear evidence of carcinogenic activity in male and female rats, respectively, for the 
occurrence of rare adenomas of the large intestines. In comparison, there was no evidence of 
carcinogenic activity in male mice and clear evidence of carcinogenic activity in female mice for lung 
 
4  
Small Business Advocacy Review. “Final Report of the Small Business Advocacy Review Panel on EPA’s Planned Proposed Rule for 1-
Bromopropane (1-BP).” SBAR. December 16, 2021. https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0066. 
5  
NTP (2011) “NTP Technical Report on the Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of 1-Bromopropane (CAS No. 106-94-5) in F344/N 
Rats and B6C3F1 Mice (Inhalation Studies),” NTP TR 564, U.S. National Toxicology Program (NTP), 
https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/sites/default/files/ntp/htdocs/lt_rpts/tr564.pdf  
6  
EPA (2021) “Existing Chemical Exposure Limit (ECEL) for Occupational Use of 1-Bromopropane (1-BP), U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA), at 2, https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0031/content.pdf  
7  
NTP (2011) supra note 5, at 9-10 (emphasis in original). 
8  
EPA (2005) “Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment”, EPA/630/P-03/001B, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), at 2-36, 
https://www3.epa.gov/airtoxics/cancer_guidelines_final_3-25-05.pdf 
9  
EPA (2020a) “Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide) CASRN: 106-94-5, 740/R-1/8013, at 205-207, 
https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-08/documents/risk_evaluation_for_1-bromopropane_n-propyl_bromide.pdf  

 
 
tumors. ACD mentions this because the 2005 Guidelines include, as part of the framework analysis, an 
evaluation of the question “Is the hypothesized mode of action relevant to humans?”.10 EPA held a two-
day workshop in January 2014 that explored answers to this question titled “State-of-the-Science 
Workshop on Chemically-Induced Mouse Lung Tumors: Applications to Human Health Assessment”.11 The 
summary report from this two-day workshop was not, however, cited or discussed in EPA’s final risk 
evaluation for 1-BP, nor did EPA discuss more recent scientific evaluations on this topic including the 
following: 
Smith, C.J., Perfetti, T.A., and King, J.A. (2018) “Bronchioalveolar Lung 
Tumors Induced in “Mice Only” by Non-Genotoxic Chemicals are not 
Useful for Quantitative Assessment of Pulmonary Adenocarcinoma Risk 
in Humans”, TOXICOLOGY RESEARCH AND APPLICATION, Vol. 2, 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/epub/10.1177/2397847318816617  
Cohen, S.M., Zhonguy, Y., and Bus, J.S. (2020) “Relevance of Mouse Lung 
Tumors to Human Risk Assessment”, JOURNAL OF TOXICOLOGY AND 
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH, PART B, Vol. 23, 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10937404.2020.176387
9  
EPA’s ECEL, as derived from the female mouse lung tumors, appears to be based solely on it representing 
the lowest point of departure, rather than the most relevant endpoint for mitigating unreasonable risks 
to humans. As shown below, if EPA had based its ECEL on either the keratoacanthoma/squamous cell 
carcinoma (combined) in male rats or the large intestine adenomas in female rats, the respective ECELs 
would be approximately four or six times higher. 
 
Endpoint 
Inhalation Unit Risk 
(per ppm) 
ECEL (ppm) 
ECEL (mg/m3) 
Female B6C3F1 mice; alveolar/bronchiolar 
adenoma or carcinoma (combined) 
4E-03 
0.049 ≈ 0.05 
0.245 ≈ 0.25 
Male F344 rats; keratoacanthoma/squamous 
cell carcinoma (combined) 
1.16E-03 
0.168 ≈ 0.2 
0.844 ≈ 0.84 
Female F344 rats; large intestine adenoma 
6.71E-04 
0.291 ≈ 0.3 
1.462 ≈ 1.5 
 
The ECELs based on the rat carcinogenicity data support that EPA’s acute non-cancer exposure limit 
(ELacute) of 0.17 ppm (i.e., 0.86 mg/m3) should serve as the regulatory limit required as part of EPA’s 
proposed WCPPs. There are, however, caveats to consider with this value. ACD notes that the ELacute is a 
conservative value that is 3× lower than if EPA had followed its 1994 Guidance titled “Methods for 
derivation of inhalation reference concentrations and application of inhalation dosimetry”. If EPA had 
done so, it would have calculated an ELacute of 0.57 ppm (i.e., 2.85 mg/m3), thereby justifying use of the 
 
10  
EPA (2005) supra note 8, at 2-47. 
11  
EPA (2014) “Summary Report, State-of-the-Science Workshop on Chemically-Induced Mouse Lung Tumors: Applications to Human 
Health Assessments”, EPA/600?R-14/002, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
https://ordspub.epa.gov/ords/eims/eimscomm.getfile?p_download_id=521522  

 
 
ECEL of 0.3 ppm (i.e., 1.5 mg/m3), based on the female rat data for large intestine adenoma. EPA 
provided the following justification for not following the 1994 Guidance:12 
[A] portion of the toxicokinetic uncertainty may be accounted for by the 
calculation of an HEC accounting for the relative blood/air partition 
coefficients across species and application of a dosimetric adjustment 
factor [DAF] as outlined in the RfC methodology [citation to 1994 
Guidance omitted]; however, an UFA of 10 is retained to account for 
additional toxicokinetic differences that remain unaccounted for. 1-BP is 
irritating to the respiratory tract and rodents exhibit physiological 
responses (such as reflex bradypnea) that differ from humans and may 
alter uptake due to hyper- or hypoventilation, resulting in decreased 
internal dose in rodents relative to the applied concentration. Therefore, 
a UFA of 10 is retained to account for toxicokinetic differences [citation 
omitted]. 
EPA did not, however, provide similar justifications in its other final risk evaluations for chemical 
substances that are irritating to the respiratory tract. For example, in the final risk evaluation for 1,4-
dioxane, EPA applied a reduced value of 3× for UFA after the application of a DAF.13 ACD notes that 
hypoventilation would also be a potential concern in this example, yet EPA followed the 1994 Guidance. 
Dermal Exposure 
For the dermal exposure assessment for workers, the EPA incorporated a fraction absorbed parameter 
as a modification to its “EPA/OPPT 2-Hand Dermal Exposure to Liquids Model.” This parameter was used 
to account for the volatility of 1-BP. The EPA also used, however, surrogate data on cooking oil, a highly 
viscous substance, as default values to estimate the amount of 1-BP remaining on the skin. The EPA’s use 
of the surrogate cooking oil data is the subject of a differing scientific opinion among the EPA scientists. 
On July 1, 2024, the EPA released its draft risk evaluation for 1,1-dichloroethane (1,1-DCE) and included a 
charge question to the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) Science Advisory Committee on Chemicals 
(SACC) about the appropriateness of using the surrogate cooking oil data to inform the amount of 1,1-
DCE remaining on the skin.  
The EPA’s use of these data in the 1-BP final risk evaluation to quantify unreasonable dermal risks to 
workers is, therefore, inconsistent with the scientific standards under TSCA Section 26(h)-(i). EPA must, 
therefore, hold off on issuing the 1-BP proposed rule as final, until it receives the TSCA SACC’s 
recommendations on whether the EPA was justified in using the surrogate cooking oil data on 1,1-DCE 
and other low-viscosity substances like 1-BP. If the TSCA SACC determines that the EPA inappropriately 
used the surrogate cooking oil data, then the EPA must revise its final risk evaluation for 1-BP and re-
issue its proposed 1-BP rule based on the revised unreasonable risk determinations. 
 
12  
EPA (2020a) supra note 9, at 214-215. 
13  
See, e.g., EPA (2020b) “Final Risk Evaluation for 1,4-Dioxane CASRN: 123-91-1, EPA-740-R1-8007, U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA), at 198, https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-12/documents/1._risk_evaluation_for_14-dioxane_casrn_123-
91-1.pdf 

 
 
Need for Collaboration to Adopt Successful WCPP Requirements 
TSCA is intended to supplement, not replace, other established regulatory requirements. Additionally, 
because the actions of this rule are limited to TSCA-regulated uses, ACD recommends that the EPA work 
with the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to align on a WCPP. This coordination 
and partnership with OSHA would, to the fullest extent possible, protect the broadest population from 
unreasonable exposure risks through robust industrial hygiene practices and controls, including proper 
use of PPE. 
Furthermore, allowing entities to demonstrate that they can meet the requirements of the WCPP, versus 
outright prohibition of certain uses, would enable businesses — especially small businesses — that rely 
on the use of 1-BP to remain in operation while also protecting their workers. A WCPP is a practical and 
reasonable way for EPA to address exposure risks of certain toxic chemicals without interfering with 
national security or critical infrastructure or putting livelihoods at risk. 
ACD also recommends that the EPA engage with recognized industrial hygiene and safety experts, such 
as the American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA), when developing the WCPP. Other stakeholders, 
including those who meet the rigorous standards of programs like ACD’s Responsible DistributionTM and 
the American Chemistry Council’s Responsible Care®, should also be included in the conversation as they 
are recognized experts who can competently address safety measures already in place at their facilities.  
De Minimis Exemption 
The EPA requests comment on the inclusion of a de minimis level of 1-BP in formulations where it is an 
impurity at concentrations (i.e., less than 0.1% or 0.5% by weight) when finalizing COU prohibitions. 
Products containing 1-BP below this threshold would not be subject to the requirements in the proposal. 
ACD supports this inclusion of a de minimis level and applauds EPA’s willingness to include the exemption 
in the proposal.  
ACD supports including a de minimis exemption as there are no threats of an unreasonable risk when the 
presence of 1-BP is trivial. Allowing this de minimis exemption gives regulated entities important 
operational flexibility. Without this de minimis threshold, manufacturers and importers of TSCA-
regulated chemicals would have to declare and prove through documentation that no 1-BP was present 
in those products. This would subject manufacturers and importers to unrealistic reporting 
requirements. 
Chemical Distribution Industry Impact  
ACD members provide essential chemical products that support critical processes in every sector of the 
economy. Members sell imported and domestically sourced 1-BP and mixtures where 1-BP is present as 
an intentional component, by-product, or impurity. Some ACD members physically handle and distribute 
these products, while under other ACD members’ business models, they serve as brokers. In these 
scenarios, they source these substances for customers and never come into physical contact with the 
products.  

 
 
ACD members sell essential products nationwide to large corporations, small businesses, municipalities, 
states, and the federal government. Every other year, ACD members self-report 14 the sectors into which 
they sell and the following table outlines ACD member companies’ presence in markets relevant to these 
proposed risk management actions.  
 
2023 ACD Member Market Presence 
Market Segment 
Percentage of Membership 
CASE15 Adhesives & Sealants 
49% 
Cleaners & Compounding: Soaps Detergents 
56% 
Automotive 
49% 
Paints and Coatings 
61% 
General Manufacturing 
61% 
Metal Finishing 
50% 
Construction 
46% 
Plastics 
44% 
 
If the EPA prohibits certain uses and sets unachievable exposure limits, it risks severely restricting the 
manufacture, import, distribution, and use of 1-BP as a solvent. This chemistry is essential to the 
chemical distribution industry because it is used as a viable alternative to the other halogenated solvents 
being regulated.  
One ACD member, classified as a small business, has 85 active accounts using this product. They sell into 
a wide range of industrial applications, including aerospace, automotive, and electric vehicles and 
batteries, military suppliers, durable goods, medical devices, and several other uses. The solvent is used 
downstream by their customers primarily in vapor degreasers, in both vacuum and open-top machines. 
It is also used to clean metallic substrates to remove difficult contaminants in extremely tight spaces and 
blind holes.  
While alternatives are feasible, some caveats must be considered. Other than switching to another 
chlorinated solvent, most end users who want to continue to vapor degrease are looking into the use of 
fluorinated blends, hydrocarbons, or modified alcohols. Aqueous alternatives are also an option. The first 
issue with an alternative is determining whether it will clean the substrate. If an alternative solvent can 
 
14  
Alliance for Chemical Distribution. “ACD Annual Report 2023.” ACD. Accessed September 10, 2024. https://www.acd-
chem.com/nacdcom/assets/file/public/2023annualreport/.  
15  
Coatings, Adhesives, Sealants, and Elastomers (CASE) 

 
 
be used, then the next challenge is to determine whether the machine needs to be modified. If the 
machine cannot be modified, purchasing new equipment is required, which can be very expensive. 
Moreover, identifying and sourcing new equipment can have lead times of up to 12 months. If aqueous 
chemistry can work, the footprint of the equipment needs to be considered, as well as the cost of energy 
to heat the chemistry and dry the parts. There is also a concern with treating the wastewater from the 
system. As mentioned previously, many of these concerns, including the lead times, costs, energy 
consumption, and the importance of 1-BP to small businesses, were reiterated in the EPA’s SBAR Panel. 16 
Finally, as spelled out in the proposed WCPP, there must be the use of proper PPE and exhaust of the 
equipment. All users of the solvents should be required to record and monitor vapors. ACD’s member, as 
a significant distributor of these chemicals, recommends and assists the end users in the proper use of 
the solvents and testing protocols. 
Prohibitions on certain uses of 1-BP would cause devastating effects that would reverberate throughout 
the value chain. These regulatory actions would eliminate the ability of ACD members to supply their 
customers with chemicals critical to product formulation, manufacturing, or application. This rule, 
coupled with the EPA actions on Trichloroethylene (TCE), perchloroethylene (PCE), and methylene 
chloride are making it very difficult for the downstream industries into which ACD members sell, 
especially the industrial surface finishing industry, to economically adjust to the rapid changes, not to 
mention the lead time and expense of new equipment. This change has been anticipated for several 
years, and most end users have updated their equipment to limit exposure, reduce waste, and control 
costs. However, eliminating these infinitely recyclable solvents will force users to either switch to much 
more expensive alternatives and require them to make enormous equipment investments or shut down 
their production altogether and move their process out of the U.S. to a more favorable location.  
The EPA should consider extending the compliance timelines for the final rule to enable businesses, 
especially small entities, to adjust their operations to meet the frequent and significant changes required 
under the EPA’s recent TSCA Section 6 actions. The EPA must remember that the chemical distribution 
industry does not handle singular chemicals; their operations manage hundreds of chemistries. ACD has 
numerous members impacted by several of the Agency’s risk management actions. Expecting businesses 
to adapt to a dozen new exposure standards without encountering significant and burdensome 
operational and economic effects is unrealistic. The EPA must align its TSCA Section 6 changes with other 
regulatory standards and requirements as much as possible. More uniform standards reduce costs and 
streamline transition periods. Importantly, the EPA acknowledges that some COUs and some activities or 
facilities may require additional compliance timeframes to transition appropriately. For example, those 
instances where PCE – which is undergoing its own TSCA Section 6 rulemaking – and 1-BP are desired 
substances because they are non-flammable solvents used as cleaning agents for vapor degreasing. The 
EPA recognizes that additional time is needed to identify an alternative chemical or process to avoid 
flammability concerns in these instances.17 
 
16  
Small Business Advocacy Review. “Final Report of the Small Business Advocacy Review Panel on EPA’s Planned Proposed Rule for 1-
Bromopropane (1-BP).” SBAR. December 16, 2021. https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0066. 
 
17  
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. “1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA).” EPA. 
August 8, 2024. EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471. https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2024-17204. 

 
 
Economic Impact 
To demonstrate the impacts that this rulemaking has and how it will directly impact the chemical 
distribution industry, the ACD employed the services of John Dunham & Associates (JDA) to conduct an 
economic analysis of this proposed rule along with other recent TSCA Section 6 rulemakings to evaluate 
the cumulative economic impact that these regulatory actions could have on the chemical distribution 
industry. 
When analyzing this cost’s impact at the distribution level, JDA estimates the overall cost of the rule 
would be over $28.3 million for the chemical distribution sector. This would have an adverse economic 
impact. 
Based on a model developed for the ACD by JDA, the annualized cost of the rule on the chemical 
distribution industry alone would be equal to $0.002 per ton, resulting in a 0.001 percent increase in the 
cost of chemicals.18   
Also based on the JDA model, this additional fee will result in 940 tons of reduced chemical sales.19  This 
is a decrease of about 0.0015 percent of the current volume.20 Lower sales volumes will result in reduced 
jobs as distributors need fewer truck drivers, clerks, and warehouse staff. 
Table 2 
Economic Impact of the Proposed Rule on the Chemical Distribution Industry  
 
 
 
As Table 2 shows, the fees would impact both the chemical distribution industry and its customers.  
Around 1 FTE chemical distributor jobs could be lost due to the higher prices under the proposed rule. 
Including businesses that supply chemical distributors, and those that depend on re-spending by direct 
and supplier firm employees, the rule would lead to a total of about 3 fewer FTE jobs and over $200,000 
in lost wages and benefits. On top of this, the American economy would be reduced by just under 
$700,000.   
This is just the impact on the chemical distribution industry. Higher prices for chemicals will flow through 
nearly every other sector of the economy, leading to more job losses. Also, while the economic impact 
numbers may seem relatively small for this rule, when combined with the EPA’s other recent risk 
management actions, the cumulative cost is substantial. The economic report on the cumulative impact 
of the EPA’s recent risk management actions and the JDA demand model methodology are included in 
full in these comments as Appendix A and B, respectively. 
 
18  
This is based on the tonnage of all chemicals, with the costs spread out across the entire market. 
19  
Prepared for the Alliance for Chemical Distribution by John Dunham & Associates, 2023.  See methodology section, 
20  
This is true even though chemical sales are not extremely price sensitive.  In other words, they have an elasticity of less than -1.0.  In 
this model, at this price level, the average elasticity is calculated to be-0.416. 
Direct
Supplier
Induced
Total
Jobs
(1)
                          
(1)
                                
(2)
                          
(3)
                            
Wages
(53,577)
$               
(51,469)
$                     
(99,316)
$               
(204,361)
$               
Output
(206,552)
$             
(142,123)
$                   
(320,090)
$             
(668,765)
$               

 
 
Conclusion 
Every chemical that has undergone the TSCA Section 6 chemical risk evaluation process has received an 
unreasonable risk determination that has led to bans and/or unachievable and indefensible workplace 
standards, with time-limited exemptions granted where the EPA deemed appropriate. Chemicals are 
essential to daily life, including those that undergo risk evaluation and risk management, and if the EPA 
unnecessarily restricts and bans substances that have no or limited viable alternatives, there will be 
severe unintended consequences for the health, safety, and well-being of the public. Congress did not 
intend this result in amending TSCA eight years ago. 
For all the above reasons, ACD strongly urges the EPA to reconsider its proposed regulatory actions for 1-
BP. The proposed requirements are overly prescriptive and unnecessarily prohibit several uses. Instead, 
ACD urges the EPA to focus on establishing workable WCPPs for each condition of use to ensure workers 
and the general public are safe while allowing critical uses of 1-BP to continue.  
Thank you for your consideration. If you have questions or require additional information, please do not 
hesitate to contact me.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Jennifer C. Gibson 
Senior Vice President, Regulatory Affairs 
 
 

 
 
APPENDIX A 
Cumulative Economic Analysis  
 
 
According to the General Accounting Office, the current Administration has been enacting new rules at a 
rapid pace.  In 2023, the Biden Administration enacted 1,629 new rules (4.5 new rules every single day), 
of which 81 were major rules, leading to significant economic costs and business disruptions.  The pace 
has quickened in 2024, with 77 new rules, of which 63 were major, enacted so far.  That means that 2 
major rules are being enacted every 3 days. And this is just the rules being submitted to the Government 
Accountability Office (GAO) for Congressional Review.21 
The typical alphabet soup of federal regulatory agencies (EPA, FDA, OSHA, SEC, FCC, etc.) only reported 
397 final rules to the GAO, of which 275 (69.3 percent) were from the EPA.  Considering that a total of 
2,681 final rules were published in the Federal Register in 2023, it is likely that these regulatory agencies 
have been slow to inform the GAO.22  
Each of these rules adds costs to the operations of chemical distributors, which are passed on to their 
customers through higher prices.  In turn, these higher prices impact the demand for chemical products, 
not only the ones being regulated but all products sold through distributors.   
JDA has provided analysis of the cost to the industry of a number of these rules.  While individually, the 
costs may seem small, in aggregate they can be extremely expensive. 
Looking at just four of the rules examined by JDA, all of which have been proffered by the EPA under the 
Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) the overall cost to the chemical distribution industry totals $48.2 
million per year.  The rules are: 
1. Additional regulations on the use of 1-bromopropane (1–BP), a widely used solvent in a variety 
of occupational and consumer applications, including vapor degreasing, aerosol degreasing, 
adhesives and sealants, and insulation.  
 
2. New rules that would ostensibly ban the production, importation, and use of trichloroethylene 
(TCE) in the United States.  This is a widely used chemical in the production of products such as 
degreasers, lubricants, paints and coatings, adhesives, batteries, and spot removers. 
 
3. A rule essentially banning the use and production of perchloroethylene (PCE) a chemical used for 
the production of fluorinated compounds, as a solvent for dry cleaning and vapor degreasing, in 
 
21  
Congressional Review Act, US Government Accountability Office, https://www.gao.gov/legal/other-legal-work/congressional-review-
act#s-skipLinkTargetForFilterOptions, accessed May 8, 2024.  Note all rules are required to be submitted to the GAO but agencies do 
not always do so.  According to the GAO, The Congressional Review Act (CRA) requires agencies to submit rules to Congress and to 
GAO, as well as to delay the effective date of certain rules to provide Congress an opportunity to review and possibly disapprove of 
rules before they become effective. Twenty-eight percent of the final economically significant rules issued during the Trump 
Administration (37 of 131) did not meet at least one timing requirement of the CRA or were not submitted to GAO or to Congress. 
Similar data for the Biden Administration are not yet available. 
22  
Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration at: https://www.federalregister.gov/.  Accessed May 9, 2024 

 
 
catalyst regeneration in petrochemical manufacturing.  It is also a component of a variety of 
commercial and consumer applications including adhesives, paints and coatings, aerosol 
degreasers, brake cleaners, aerosol lubricants, sealants, stone polish, stainless steel polish, and 
wipe cleaners.  
 
4. A rule essentially banning the use and production of Methylene Chloride, a chemical that is 
widely used solvent in a variety of consumer and commercial applications including adhesives 
and sealants, automotive products, and paint and coating removers.  
Each of these rules impose specific costs on chemical manufacturers (which are then passed on to 
distributors), as well as on distributors themselves.  The cost and the impact of each rule is shown in 
Table 1 below. 
Table 1 
Expected Annual Cost of TSCA Rules on the Chemical Distribution Industry ($2024) 
 
 
 
As the table shows, the imposition of $48.2 million of additional costs on the chemical distribution 
industry would lead to a total of 379,013 tons in lost chemical sales, as customers react to the higher 
prices. This is a loss in current sales of 0.56 percent. If these were considered to be one rule change, it 
would result in over 1,310 lost full-time-equivalent jobs in the chemical distribution industry, including 
nearly 290 lost FTE jobs in chemical distribution firms. 
 
 
 
 
Year
Rule
Estimated 
Annualized Cost
Lost Sales (Tons)
Lost Distributor 
Jobs
Total Lost 
Jobs
Total Lost Economic 
Activity
2023 Methylene Chloride; Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)
1,269,517
$               
9,070
                   
7
                               
31
                  
6,645,664.24
$             
2023 Perchloroethylene (PCE); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)
10,235,154
$             
72,980
                 
55
                             
252
                
53,527,340.96
$           
2023 Trichloroethylene (TCE); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)
36,558,537
$             
296,023
               
224
                           
1,027
             
217,804,688.39
$         
2024 1-Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA)
165,053
$                  
940
                       
1
                               
3
                     
668,765
$                      
Total
48,228,261
$             
379,013
               
287
                           
1,313
             
278,646,459
$              

 
 
APPENDIX B 
Demand Model Methodology 
JDA’s Regulatory Assessment Model (RAM) is an updated version of a multi-market demand model first 
developed by the American Economics Group (AEG) under contract with Philip Morris. It was completely 
rebuilt by Dr. Hyeyeon Park in 2001, and its structure was updated by JDA in 2019. The model was 
presented to the National Conference of State Legislatures, Senior Fiscal Analysts Seminar in Portland, 
Maine, on September 4, 1999, where it was well received. In fact, at that time, many state fiscal analysts 
asked if the model could be made available to them as a forecasting tool. The results from the model 
were also presented to the Tax Foundation Excise Tax Seminar, held in Jacksonville, Florida, on January 
12, 2001, as part of a larger discussion on the economic impact of tobacco taxes. 
Since then, the RAM model has been modified to work with nearly any product or market. It is designed 
to measure product sales in a multi-state market structure with differential pricing. The general 
methodology is a two-stage estimation of the demand equation linked to a non-linear programming 
model of import and export patterns. Data for the model comes from the 2023 Economic Impact Model 
of the Chemical Distribution Industry, as well as from the US Census Bureau, the Bureau of Economic 
Analysis, the Bureau of Transportation Statistics Commodity Flow Survey, and JDA research. Caliper 
Corporation was used to estimate distances between states.  
Estimates on what sales should be in each state are developed first. In this case, both demand and prices 
come directly from the Impact model. If cross-border sales were observable, the calculations would be 
complete; however, since they are not, the model must estimate them through non-linear programming 
techniques that solve the 51 demand functions simultaneously. The model adjusts the cross-price 
elasticities between states to balance the actual sales with expected demand. 
Demand elasticities are calculated using a logarithmic demand curve with a base of -0.805, which is an 
average for chemical products.23 
Once the linear program model balances, the model can be shocked with either new prices or demand 
values. By rebalancing the model following the shock, it is possible to calculate demand response 
estimates across all states (as well as cross-border sales changes).  
Revenue and job impacts can then be estimated through linear extrapolation. 
 
 
23  
See Gallaway, Michael, et. al., Short-run and long-run industry-level estimates of US Armington elasticities, North American Journal 
of Economics and Finance, March 2003.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0150 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
Albemarle Corporation 
4250 Congress Street, Suite 900 
Charlotte, North Carolina 28209 
 
www.albemarle.com 
 
1 
 
September 23, 2024 
 
 
 
Ms. Bethany Masten 
Existing Chemicals Risk Management Division 
Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW 
Washington, DC  20460–0001 
Submitted via regulations.gov (Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471) 
 
Re: 
Comments on 1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Proposed Regulation Under the Toxic 
Substances Control Act (TSCA); Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dear Ms. Masten: 
 
Albemarle Corporation (Albemarle) is a global manufacturer of specialty chemicals, among whose 
product line includes 1-bromopropane (1-BP) as an important part of our portfolio. As a 
manufacturer and in conjunction with leading experts and key users of our products, Albemarle has 
developed considerable expertise with respect to 1-BP. Albemarle appreciates the opportunity to 
provide comments on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed risk 
management rule for 1-BP (CAS RN®106-94-5), issued under the Toxic Substances Control Act 
(TSCA).1  
 
Albemarle has actively engaged in the administrative process leading up to EPA’s proposed risk 
management rule on 1-BP and appreciates the opportunity to comment on this proposal.2 
Albemarle’s comments focus on the following aspects of the proposal: 
- 
The science that serves as the basis for EPA’s proposed risk management rule for 1-BP (i.e., 
systematic review and EPA’s evaluation of the carcinogenic mode of action [MOA] for 1-BP).  
- 
EPA’s existing chemical exposure limit (ECEL) and the surrogate data EPA used for informing 
its dermal exposure estimates to workers.  
- 
EPA’s unreasonable cancer risk determinations, as informed by its inhalation unit risk (IUR) 
derived from lung tumors in female mice, with a focus on vapor degreasing operations.  
- 
A request to reconsider the proposed ECEL of 0.05 ppm (0.25 mg/m3) using data that are not of 
questionable relevance to humans.
 
1  
89 Fed. Reg. 65066 (August 8, 2024), available at https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2024-08-
08/pdf/2024-17204.pdf. 
2  
See, e.g., Albemarle (2019a), Re: Draft Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) Risk Evaluations and TSCA Science 
Advisory Committee on Chemicals (SACC) Meetings; 1-Bromopropane; Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2019-0235, 
Albemarle Corporation, August 30, 2019, https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2019-0235-
0029/attachment_1.pdf  

 
1 
 
Systematic Review 
 
EPA completed a TSCA Section 6 risk evaluation on 1-BP (the 2020 1-BP RE) in August 2020.3 
EPA stated in the 2020 1-BP RE that “To meet [the] TSCA § 26 science standards, EPA used the 
TSCA systematic review process described in the Application of Systematic Review in TSCA 
Risk Evaluations document [the 2018 SR Document] [citation omitted].”4 The 2018 SR 
Document was subsequently peer reviewed by the U.S. National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM), which concluded that the approach did not meet the 
criteria of “comprehensive, workable, objective, and transparent” and that “The OPPT approach 
to systematic review does not adequately meet the state-of-practice.”5 In response to the NASEM 
review, EPA revised its systematic review method. On December 20, 2021, EPA released the 
2021 Draft Systematic Review Protocol Supporting TSCA Risk Evaluations for Chemical 
Substances Version 1.0 (the 2021 Draft SR Protocol) for public comment.6 EPA acknowledged 
in the 2021 Draft SR Protocol that:7 
 
Previously [in the 2018 SR Document], EPA did not have a complete clear and 
documented TSCA systematic review (SR) Protocol. EPA is addressing this lack of a 
priori protocol by releasing [the 2021 Draft Protocol]. 
 
EPA’s acknowledgment supports that it did not comply with the scientific standards under TSCA 
Section 26 and the implementing regulations at that time under 40 C.F.R. Part 702, which 
stated:8 
 
Weight of scientific evidence means a systematic review method, applied in a manner 
suited to the nature of the evidence or decision, that uses a pre-established protocol 
to comprehensively, objectively, transparently, and consistently, identify and evaluate 
each stream of evidence, including strengths, limitations, and relevance of each study 
and to integrate evidence as necessary and appropriate based upon strengths, 
limitations, and relevance. [emphasis added] 
 
 
3  
EPA (2020a), Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide) CASRN: 106-94-5, EPA Document No. 
740-R1-8013, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-
08/documents/risk_evaluation_for_1-bromopropane_n-propyl_bromide.pdf. 
4  
Id. at 30. 
5  
NASEM (2021), The Use of Systematic Review in EPA’s Toxic Substances Control Act Risk Evaluations, 
Consensus Study Report, Highlights, (Feb. 2021), U.S. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine (NASEM) at 2, 4, https://www.nap.edu/resource/25952/TSCA%204-pager%20final.pdf. 
6  
86 Fed. Reg. 71891 (Dec. 20, 2021), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2021-12-20/pdf/2021-
27437.pdf. 
7  
EPA (2021a), Draft Systematic Review Protocol Supporting TSCA Risk Evaluations for Chemical Substances 
Version 1.0, A Generic TSCA Systematic Review Protocol with Chemical-Specific Methodologies, EPA Document 
No. EPA-D-20-031, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 25, 
https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2021-12/draft-systematic-review-protocol-supporting-tsca-
risk-evaluations-for-chemical-substances_0.pdf.  
8  
82 Fed. Reg. 33726, 33733 (July 20, 2017), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2017-07-20/pdf/2017-
14337.pdf.  

 
2 
 
Albemarle notes that EPA was made aware that its 2018 SR Document failed to comply with 
these legal requirements prior to NASEM issuing its report. For example, during a July 2019 
TSCA Science Advisory Committee on Chemicals (SACC) peer review meeting on a draft risk 
evaluation, a public commenter identified various issues with EPA’s systematic review including 
the following:9 
 
The first critical piece of missing information is creating a protocol which is used to 
review all the evidence and outline the process for conducting the review. This helps 
minimize bias and ensure transparency in the decision-making process. It’s also 
required by law to have a preestablished protocol, and there’s not one for 1,4-
Dioxane or the other TSCA chemicals. [emphasis added] 
 
On July 20, 2022, EPA announced a draft revision to the risk determination for the 2020 1-BP 
RE.10 EPA provided the following justification for its decision to re-issue the risk 
determination:11 
 
In accordance with Executive Order 13990 [citation omitted] and other 
Administration priorities [citations omitted], EPA reviewed the risk evaluations for 
the first ten chemical substances, including 1-BP, to ensure that they meet the 
requirements of TSCA, including conducting decision making in a manner that is 
consistent with the best available science. 
 
On December 19, 2022, EPA announced the final revision to the risk determination for the 2020 
1-BP RE.12 In that announcement, EPA stated its conclusion that:13 
 
EPA views the peer reviewed hazard and exposure assessments and associated risk 
characterization as robust and upholding the standards of best available science and 
weight of the scientific evidence per TSCA sections 26(h) and (i). 
 
EPA’s re-evaluation did not, however, address its systematic review, which failed to comply 
with TSCA Section 26 and the implementing regulations at that time. 
 
 
 
 
9  
EPA (2019), EPA Scientific Advisory Committee on Chemicals (SACC), Open Meeting, Toxic Substances Control 
Act, 1,4-Dioxane, Docket number: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2019-0238, Holiday Inn Rosslyn at Key Bridge, 1900 Fort Myer 
Drive, Arlington, VA 22209, July 29-30, 2019, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), at 125-126, 
available at: https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2019-0238-0064/content.pdf. 
10  87 Fed. Reg. 43265 (July 20, 2022), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2022-07-20/pdf/2022-
15516.pdf.  
11  Id. at 43266. 
12  87 Fed. Reg. 77603 (December 19, 2022), https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2022-12-19/pdf/2022-
27439.pdf.  
13  Id. at 77606. 

 
3 
 
Carcinogenic MOA and Human Relevance of Female Mouse 
Lung Tumors 
 
EPA derived a lifetime cancer existing chemical exposure limit (ECELcancer) of 0.05 ppm (0.25 
mg/m3), based on the incidence of alveolar/bronchiolar adenoma or carcinoma in female mice 
from two-year carcinogenicity studies performed on male and female mice and rats.14,15 EPA did 
not, however, provide a scientific justification for the selection of these data over the incidence 
data in male rats (e.g., keratoacanthoma squamous cell carcinoma) or female rats (e.g., rare large 
intestine adenoma).16 Albemarle acknowledges that uncertainty in the human relevance of a 
carcinogenic MOA may be an appropriate reason for selecting a particular data set from which to 
evaluate unreasonable risks. There are, however, procedural requirements for making such a 
determination, which EPA did not comply with. 
 
EPA stated the following in the 2020 1-BP RE under the section header titled “Weight of the 
Scientific Evidence for Cancer”:17  
 
The exact mechanism/mode of action of 1-BP carcinogenesis is not established. 
Evidence for a [mutagenic mode of action] MMOA is suggestive but inconclusive. 
Other potential mechanisms that may contribute to the multi-stage process of 
carcinogenesis by 1-BP include oxidative stress, immunosuppression, and cell 
proliferation. Overall, there is evidence in high-quality animal studies to support 
carcinogenicity following 1-BP exposure. Therefore, these endpoints were carried 
forward for dose-response analysis. 
 
EPA did not, however, perform an evaluation of the carcinogenic MOA(s) for these data, 
pursuant to its 2005 “Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment” (the 2005 Guidelines).18 
Instead, EPA prepared an approximate one-page summary on the carcinogenic MOA for 1-BP 
under a section header titled “Possible Mode of Action for 1-BP Toxicity”.19 This does not, 
however, satisfy the scientific standards under TSCA Sections 26(h)-(i), which require an 
evaluation consistent with the carcinogenic framework analysis as described in the 2005 
Guidelines.20  
 
 
14  EPA (2021b), Existing Chemical Exposure Limit (ECEL) for Occupational Use of 1-Bromopropane (1-BP), U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), at 2, https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-
0471-0031. 
15  NTP (2011), NTP Technical Report on the Toxicology and Carcinogenesis Studies of 1-Bromopropane (CAS No. 
106-94-5) in F344/N Rats and B6C3F1 Mice (Inhalation Studies), NTP TR 564, U.S. National Toxicology Program 
(NTP), https://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/sites/default/files/ntp/htdocs/lt_rpts/tr564.pdf 
16  EPA (2020a), supra note 4, at 225. 
17  Id. at 205. 
18  EPA (2005), Guidelines for Carcinogen Risk Assessment, EPA/630/P-03/001B, U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA), at 2-36, https://www3.epa.gov/airtoxics/cancer_guidelines_final_3-25-05.pdf. 
19  EPA (2020a), supra note 3, at 205-207. 
20  EPA (2005), supra note 18. 

 
4 
 
EPA also did not cite to or discuss reasonably available information on the carcinogenic MOA(s) 
for the identified neoplasia in rats and mice from the NTP studies, as required under TSCA 
Section 26(k), which states: 
In carrying out sections 4, 5, and 6, the Administrator shall take into consideration 
information relating to a chemical substance or mixture, including hazard and 
exposure information, under the conditions of use, that is reasonably available to the 
Administrator. 
For example, the human relevance of chemically-induced mouse lung tumors has been a topic of 
scientific discussion for many years, including by EPA scientists, which held a workshop on this 
topic in January 2014 titled “State-of-the-Science Workshop on Chemically-induced Mouse Lung 
Tumors: Applications to Human Health Assessments” (the 2014 Workshop).21 Since this time, 
more recent evaluations on the human relevance of chemically-induced mouse lung tumors, 
particularly in female mice, have been contributed to the peer-reviewed scientific 
literature.22,23Albemarle encouraged EPA to consider this information, as part of its 2019 public 
comments on EPA’s draft risk evaluation for 1-BP.24,25,26 EPA did not, however, cite to or 
discuss the 2014 Workshop, the information Albemarle provided in its 2019 public comments, 
nor peer-reviewed investigations on this topic that pre-dated the 2020 1-BP RE. 
Albemarle acknowledges that EPA may rightfully have a different scientific opinion (DSO) on 
the human relevance of chemically-induced lung tumors in female mice versus the 
interpretations of other scientists. DSOs are, after all, part of the scientific process. Albemarle’s 
concern is that EPA did not provide its DSO, if that is the case, in the 2020 1-BP RE. Rather, 
EPA chose not to discuss scientific interpretations of carcinogenic MOAs in the 2020 1-BP RE, 
which conflicts with the scientific standards under TSCA Section 26 and the transparency 
requirements of EPA’s scientific integrity policy.27 
 
21  EPA (2014), Summary Report, State-of-the-Science Workshop on Chemically-Induced Mouse Lung Tumors: 
Applications to Human Health Assessments, EPA/600/R-14/002, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
https://ordspub.epa.gov/ords/eims/eimscomm.getfile?p_download_id=521522  
22  See, e.g., Smith et al. (2018), Bronchioalveolar Lung Tumors Induced in “Mice Only” by Non-Genotoxic 
Chemicals are not Useful for Quantitative Assessment of Pulmonary Adenocarcinoma Risk in Humans, 
TOXICOLOGY RESEARCH AND APPLICATION, Vol. 2, 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/epub/10.1177/2397847318816617  
23  See, e.g., Cohen et al. (2020), Relevance of Mouse Lung Tumors to Human Risk Assessment, JOURNAL OF 
TOXICOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH, Part B, Vol. 23, 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/10937404.2020.1763879.  
24  See, e.g., Albemarle (2019b), Comment Regarding USEPA Draft Risk Assessment on 1-Bromopropane, 
Attachment to Albemarle (2019a), Albemarle Corporation, https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OPPT-
2019-0235-0029/attachment_3.pdf  
25  See, e.g., Albemarle (2019c), Bronchioloalveolar Lung Tumors Induced in “Mice Only” by Non-Genotoxic 
Chemicals are not Useful for Quantitative Assessment of Pulmonary Adenocarcinoma Risk in Humans, 
Attachment to Albemarle (2019a), Albemarle Corporation, https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OPPT-
2019-0235-0029/attachment_4.pdf  
26  See, e.g., Albemarle (2019d), Mouse Lung Tumor Paper Supplemental Materials, Attachment to Albemarle 
(2019a), Albemarle Corporation, https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2019-0235-
0029/attachment_6.pdf  
27  EPA (2012), Scientific Integrity Policy for Transparent & Objective Science (updated in 2020), U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), at 2, https://www.epa.gov/system/files/documents/2023-
12/scientific_integrity_policy_2012_accessible.pdf  

 
5 
 
Existing Chemical Exposure Limit 
 
EPA stated in the 2024 Proposed Rule that it “is proposing an ECEL of 0.05 parts per million 
(ppm) (0.25 mg/ m3) for inhalation exposures to 1-BP as an 8-hour TWA. This ECEL is based on 
the cancer inhalation unit risk (IUR) at a risk level of 1 × 10-4, which is the most sensitive 
hazard value across acute, chronic non-cancer, and cancer endpoints. [emphasis added]”28 
Albemarle agrees with EPA that its IUR is the most sensitive hazard value. There is, however, no 
requirement under TSCA for EPA to use the most sensitive hazard value, rather EPA is required 
to use the best available science and weight of scientific evidence, per TSCA Sections 26(h)-(i). 
EPA is also required to conduct risk evaluations and to make risk determinations “without 
consideration of costs or other nonrisk factors”, per TSCA Section 6(b)(4)(A). EPA’s decision to 
regulate from the most sensitive hazard value conflicts with the scientific standards under TSCA 
Section 26 and implicitly incorporates a precautionary approach (i.e., a nonrisk factor) into its 
decision making. 
 
As discussed in the previous section, EPA did not perform an evaluation of the carcinogenic 
MOA(s) for the available carcinogenicity data in rats and mice, per the requirements under 
TSCA Sections 26(h)-(i). The implications of EPA’s failure to satisfy these legal requirements 
are discussed below. 
 
EPA calculated human equivalent concentrations (HECs) for the carcinogenicity data on rats and 
mice, as shown in Table 1.29 
 
Table 1. Carcinogenic Points of Departure (PODs) from the 2020 1-BP RE. 
Species; Tumor Type 
Exposure 
Duration 
Multistage Model BMR 10% 
ER 
BMCHEC 
(ppm) 
BMCLHEC 
(ppm) 
Male F344 rats; 
keratoacanthoma/squamous cell 
carcinoma (combined) 
40 hours/week 
141 
86 
Female F344 rats; large intestine 
adenoma 
40 hours/week 
254 
149 
Female B6C3F1 mice; 
alveolar/bronchiolar adenoma or 
carcinoma (combined) 
40 hours/week 
36 
25 
 
EPA selected only the POD from female mice for deriving an IUR (i.e., the underlying basis for 
EPA’s ECEL). EPA provided the following justification for selecting these data: 
 
The data for lung tumors based on the combined incidence of alveolar/bronchiolar 
adenoma or carcinoma in female mice [section reference omitted] was selected for 
 
28  89 Fed. Reg. 65066, 65082. 
29  EPA (2020a), supra note 3, at 225. 

 
6 
 
derivation of the inhalation unit risk (IUR) and for the dermal slope factor. This POD 
is considered protective for the other tumor types. 
 
Albemarle notes EPA’s emphasis on the precautionary nature of this value rather than its 
conclusion that this value is based on EPA’s determination that it satisfies the scientific standards 
under TSCA Section 26(h)-(i). 
 
EPA calculated the IUR and ECEL shown in Table 2 (bolded values).30,31 Albemarle provides 
for comparison the IURs and ECELs for the rat PODs shown in Table 1. Albemarle notes that 
the ECELs derived from the male and female rat data are nearly four and six times higher, 
respectively, than EPA’s ECEL derived from the female mouse data. 
 
Table 2. IURs and ECELs Derived from the NTP studies on Rats and Mice. 
Species; Tumor Type 
IUR (per ppm) 
ECEL (ppm)a 
ECEL (mg/m3)a 
Male F344 rats; 
keratoacanthoma/squamous 
cell carcinoma (combined) 
1.16E-03 
0.2 
0.8 
Female F344 rats; large 
intestine adenoma 
6.7E-04 
0.3 
1.5 
Female B6C3F1 mice; 
alveolar/bronchiolar 
adenoma or carcinoma 
(combined) 
4E-03 
0.05 
0.25 
a Albemarle calculated the rat IURs and ECELs, per EPA’s instructions. See footnotes 30 and 
31. 
 
EPA also derived an acute non-cancer exposure limit (ELacute) of 0.17 ppm (0.86 mg/m3).32 EPA 
did not include this limit as part of its proposed risk management rule on 1-BP, noting that the 
ECEL of 0.05 ppm would “address unreasonable risks for chronic cancer and non-cancer and 
acute non-cancer inhalation endpoints.”33 The ELacute does, however, warrant discussion, as it 
exemplifies Albemarle’s previous statements on EPA’s decision making in the 2020 1-BP RE 
that conflicts with the scientific standards under TSCA Section 26. 
 
For the ELacute, EPA applied a composite uncertainty factor of 100×, which included a factor of 
10× for intraspecies uncertainty (i.e., human-to-human variability) and 10× for interspecies 
uncertainty (i.e., uncertainty with extrapolating from animals to humans). EPA derived the 
ELacute from an HEC, which included application of a dosimetric adjustment factor (DAF). The 
interspecies uncertainty factor is composed of two subcomponents (i.e., toxicokinetics [TK] ≈ 3× 
and toxicodynamics [TD] ≈ 3×). When a DAF is applied for deriving an HEC, the TK 
subcomponent of the interspecies uncertainty factor is reduced from 3× to 1×. The remaining 
value of 3× accounts for the TD subcomponent. Therefore, EPA should have applied a composite 
uncertainty factor of 30×, not 100×, when deriving the ELacute, per its 1994 guidance titled 
 
30  Id. at 226. 
31  EPA (2021b), supra note 14. 
32  EPA (2021b), supra note 14. 
33  89 Fed. Reg. 65066, at 65072-65073. 

 
7 
 
Methods for Derivation of Inhalation Reference Concentrations and Application of Inhalation 
Dosimetry (the 1994 RFC Guidance).34 EPA provided the following justification for its departure 
from the 1994 RFC Guidance:35 
 
[A] portion of the toxicokinetic uncertainty may be accounted for by the calculation 
of an HEC accounting for the relative blood/air partition coefficients across species 
and application of a dosimetric adjustment factor [DAF] as outlined in the RfC 
methodology [citation to 1994 RFC Guidance omitted]; however, an UFA of 10 is 
retained to account for additional toxicokinetic differences that remain unaccounted 
for. 1-BP is irritating to the respiratory tract and rodents exhibit physiological 
responses (such as reflex bradypnea) that differ from humans and may alter uptake 
due to hyper- or hypoventilation, resulting in decreased internal dose in rodents 
relative to the applied concentration. Therefore, an UFA of 10 is retained to account 
for toxicokinetic differences [citation omitted]. 
 
Albemarle notes that the harmonized (i.e., legally binding) classification for 1-BP in the 
European Union (EU) includes the hazard class and category code for STOT SE 3, H335, “May 
cause respiratory irritation”.36 Albemarle’s concern is not, however, based on EPA’s 
determination that 1-BP may cause respiratory tract irritation. Its concern is that EPA selectively 
applied the above justification to 1-BP yet followed the 1994 RFC Guidance in its final risk 
evaluations on other chemical substances with this same hazard concern. For example, the 
harmonized classification for 1,4-dioxane in the EU includes the hazard class and category code 
for STOT SE 3, H335, “May cause respiratory irritation.”37 In the final risk evaluation for 1,4-
dioxane, EPA applied a reduced value of 3× for UFA, after application of a DAF.38 EPA does 
not, however, provide a scientific justification why hypo- or hyperventilation would not also be a 
potential concern in this example, thereby warranting application of a 10× value for UFA, as it 
applied to 1-BP. 
 
Albemarle is concerned that EPA’s proposed risk management rule on 1-BP is based on a 
fundamentally flawed risk evaluation (i.e., the 2020 1-BP RE) that does not satisfy the scientific 
standards under TSCA Sections 26(h)-(i). Albemarle believes that the above examples support 
these concerns. 
 
34  EPA (1994), Methods for Derivation of Inhalation Reference Concentrations and Application of Inhalation 
Dosimetry, EPA Document No. EPA/600/8-90/066F, https://epa-
prgs.ornl.gov/chemicals/help/documents/METHODS_FOR_DERIVATION.PDF. 
35  EPA (2020a), supra note 3, at 214-215. 
36  ECHA (undated), 1-Bromopropane, Index Number: 602-019-00-5, EC/List no.: 203-445-0, CAS Number: 106-94-
5, Harmonised classification – Annex VI of Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 (CLP Regulation), European 
Chemicals Agency (ECHA), https://echa.europa.eu/information-on-chemicals/cl-inventory-database/-
/discli/details/111920.  
37  ECHA (undated), 1,4-Dioxane, Index Number: 603-024-00-5, EC/List no.: 204-661-8, CAS Number: 123-91-1, 
Harmonised classification – Annex VI of Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 (CLP Regulation), European Chemicals 
Agency (ECHA), https://echa.europa.eu/information-on-chemicals/cl-inventory-database/-
/discli/details/76034. 
38  EPA (2020b), Final Risk Evaluation for 1,4-Dioxane CASRN: 123-91-1, EPA-740-R1-8007, U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA), at 198, https://www.epa.gov/sites/default/files/2020-
12/documents/1._risk_evaluation_for_14-dioxane_casrn_123-91-1.pdf.  

 
8 
 
The “Oils Study” 
 
EPA calculated dermal risks from 1-BP to workers using a fraction absorbed parameter, as a 
modification to its EPA/OPPT 2-Hand Dermal Exposure to Liquids Model.39 This parameter was 
intended to address the volatility of 1-BP. EPA’s approach is, however, flawed because it used 
an “Oils study” to estimate the amount of 1-BP remaining on the skin. EPA’s use of the “Oils 
study” is currently the subject of a differing scientific opinion between EPA scientists on other 
draft risk evaluations (e.g., 1,1-dichloroethane).40 The crux of the issue is whether it is 
appropriate to use data from a low-volatility and highly viscous substance to estimate the amount 
of a highly volatile and low-viscosity substance remaining on the skin and to make unreasonable 
risk determinations from these estimates. The TSCA SACC has been charged to provide its 
scientific interpretation on this issue as part of its review of the draft risk evaluation for 1,1-
dichloroethane. EPA must, therefore, wait for the TSCA SACC’s recommendations before 
deciding to use the “Oils study” as part of its proposed risk management decisions on 1-BP. 
 
Unreasonable Risk Determination -- Vapor Degreasing 
 
EPA concluded that use of 1-BP as a vapor degreasing substance presents unreasonable cancer 
risks to workers and occupational non-users (ONU) at the central tendency and high-end 
exposures (open-top) and to workers at the high-end exposures (closed-loop). EPA concluded 
that the unreasonable risks were not mitigated for workers with respiratory protection for the 
open-top condition of use.41 EPA’s unreasonable risk determinations are, however, based on its 
IUR derived from lung tumors in female mice. 
 
As shown in  
 
 
39  EPA (2020a), supra note 3, at 128. 
40  EPA (2024), Draft Charge to the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) Science Advisory Committee on Chemicals 
(SACC), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), at 8, https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OPPT-
2024-0114-0008/content.pdf  
41  EPA (2020a), supra note 3, at 274. 

 
9 
 
Table 3, Albemarle provides comparative values for the cancer risk estimates using the IURs 
derived herein from the cancer data on male and female rats. Albemarle notes that unreasonable 
risks are still present using the high-end exposure estimates for workers or ONUs for open-top 
vapor degreasing. The magnitude of these risks is, however, decreased and absent using the 
central tendency exposure estimates. 
 
 
 

 
10 
 
Table 3. Risk Estimates for Vapor Degreasing, Open-Top, using the IURs for Mice and Rats.42 
IUR (per 
ppm); 
Source Data 
Category 
Cancer Risk 
Respirator 
APF 
Cancer Risk 
Central 
Tendency 
High-
end 
Central 
Tendency 
High-
end 
4E-03; 
Female Mice 
Worker 
1.1E-02 
1.0E-01 
50 
2.1E-04 
2.0E-03 
4E-03; 
Female mice 
Occupational 
Non-User 
(ONU) 
1.6E-04 
9.4E-04 
Not 
applicable 
(NA) 
NA 
NA 
1.16E-03; 
Male rats 
Worker 
3.09E-03 
2.93E-02 
50 
6.17E-05 
5.87E-04 
1.16E-03; 
Male rats 
ONU 
4.64E-05 
2.78E-04 
NA 
NA 
NA 
6.7E-04; 
Female rats 
Worker 
1.78E-03 
1.70E-02 
50 
3.56E-05 
3.39E-04 
6.7E-04; 
Female rats 
ONU 
2.68E-05 
1.61E-04 
NA 
NA 
NA 
 
Albemarle performed the same comparative evaluations, as shown above, for the closed-loop 
vapor degreasing operation. As shown in Table 4, these data show the same trend with a decrease 
in the magnitude of the risk estimates and complete mitigation of unreasonable risks to workers 
with respiratory protection at the high-end, across estimates, and for ONUs using the high-end 
exposure estimate and the IUR for female rats. 
 
Table 4. Risk Estimates for Vapor Degreasing, Closed-Loop, using the IURs for Mice and Rats. 
IUR (per 
ppm); Source 
Data 
Category 
Cancer Risk 
Respirator 
APF 
Cancer Risk 
Central 
Tendency 
High-end 
Central 
Tendency 
High-end 
4E-03; 
Female Mice 
Worker 
5.6E-05 
7.4E-04 
10 
NA 
7.4E-05 
4E-03; 
Female Mice 
ONU 
3.0E-05 
4.2E-04 
NA 
NA 
NA 
1.16E-03; 
Male rats 
Worker 
1.62E-05 
2.15E-04 
10 
1.62E-06 
2.15E-05 
1.16E-03; 
Male rats 
ONU 
8.7E-06 
1.22E-04 
NA 
NA 
NA 
6.7E-04; 
Female rats 
Worker 
9.38E-06 
1.24E-04 
10 
9.38E-07 
1.24E-05 
6.7E-04; 
Female rats 
ONU 
5.03E-06 
7.04E-05 
NA 
NA 
NA 
 
Albemarle encourages EPA to consider the above comparisons when revising its proposed risk 
management rule on 1-BP. These comparisons provide a risk spectrum from which risk 
managers may then make decisions considering cost and other non-risk factors, as required 
 
42  Id. 

 
11 
 
during the risk management stage. They also demonstrate that establishing an ECEL of 0.2-0.3 
ppm for 1-BP as part of the WCPP will mitigate unreasonable risks, pursuant to the requirements 
under TSCA Section 6(a). Albemarle also notes that an ECEL of 0.2-0.3 ppm is consistent with 
its internal monitoring data for vapor degreasing. As discussed in Albemarle’s public submission 
to EPA, these data showed the following:43 
 
Workplace air levels of 1-BP were very low with first shift operator one showing 
measurements of between <0.2 and <0.3 ppm and second shift operator two with 
measurements of <0.2 ppm. For first shift workers, the measurements ranged from 
between <0.2 and <0.4 ppm. For second shift workers, the measurements were all 
<0.2 ppm. 
 
Conclusion 
 
Albemarle respectfully requests that EPA consider the above comments as it proceeds with 
finalizing its proposed risk management rule on 1-BP. Albemarle supports EPA’s initiatives 
under TSCA to address chemical substances that present unreasonable risks to human health 
and/or the environment. Albemarle is, however, concerned that the underlying scientific support 
document (i.e., the 2020 1-BP RE) that serves as the basis for EPA’s proposed risk management 
rule on 1-BP is fundamentally flawed and inconsistent with the scientific standards under TSCA 
Section 26. Albemarle appreciates the opportunity to provide these comments and is available to 
discuss any questions EPA may have. I can be reached at david.kobe@albemarle.com or 980-
980-999-5180. 
 
Respectfully submitted, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
David C. Kobe II 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sr. Director Global Trade and Product Stewardship 
 
43  Albemarle (2019e), ALB Internal Study 1-BP Exposure 6-28-18, Attachment to Albemarle (2019a), Albemarle 
Corporation, https://downloads.regulations.gov/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2019-0235-0029/attachment_5.pdf.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0142 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
Sidley Austin (DC) LLP is a Delaware limited liability partnership doing business as Sidley Austin LLP and practicing in affiliation with other Sidley Austin partnerships. 
 
September 23, 2024 
VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL 
Michal Freedhoff, PhD 
Assistant Administrator 
Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
RE: EPA’s Regulation under the Toxic Substances Control Act: 1-Bromopropane 
(1-BP) Proposed Rule – (Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471); 89 Fed. Reg. 65066 
(Aug. 8, 2024) 
 
Dear Assistant Administrator Freedhoff: 
 
On behalf of the National Retail Federation (NRF), we welcome the opportunity to 
submit these comments on the proposed 1-Bromopropane (“1-BP”) rule under the Toxic 
Substances Control Act (TSCA), 89 Fed. Reg 65,066 (Aug. 8, 2024) (the “Proposed Rule”).  For 
the reasons outlined below, we are concerned the Proposed Rule’s prohibition on retailers and 
other persons from “distributing in commerce or making available” 1-BP and products 
containing 1-BP (the “Proposed Prohibitions”) would impermissibly expand the scope of 
conduct covered by the term “distribute in commerce” beyond that term’s express definition in 
TSCA.1  We are also concerned the Proposed Rule’s strict liability standard does not 
appropriately allocate compliance responsibility and the proposed compliance period for retailers 
is not reasonable or feasible.   
NRF, the world’s largest retail trade association, passionately advocates for the people, 
brands, policies, and ideas that help retail thrive.  Retail is the nation’s largest private-sector 
employer, contributing $5.3 trillion to annual GDP, and supporting one in four U.S. jobs — 55 
million working Americans.  For over a century, NRF has been a voice for every retailer and 
every retail job, educating, inspiring, and communicating the powerful impact retail has on local 
communities and global economies.  
Retailers operate very complex global supply chains, working with thousands of vendors 
to supply a wide range of products, and some online retailers allow third parties to sell their 
products in the retailers’ stores.  Retailers themselves operate under numerous different models.  
Some take title to physical products and sell them on store shelves.  Others take possession but 
 
1 15 U.S.C. § 2602(5) (emphasis added). 

 
Michal Freedhoff, PhD 
September 23, 2024 
Page 2 
 
not title, and so sell the product on consignment.  Still other business models include providing 
online marketplace services that allow third-party merchants to offer, sell, and fulfill customer 
orders without the involvement of the marketplace service provider.  Accordingly, NRF urges 
EPA meaningfully consider retailers’ unique position in the supply chain and support the 
recommendations for improving the Proposed Rule described below.  
Statutory Authority Concerns 
In the Proposed Rule, EPA proposes prohibiting “all retailers . . . from distributing in 
commerce or making available 1-bromopropane, including any 1-bromopropane containing 
products, for any use except in insulation.” 2  EPA also proposes prohibiting “all persons . . . 
from distributing in commerce or making available 1-bromopropane, including any 1-
bromopropane containing products, for the uses” specified in the proposed text of 40 C.F.R. 
§ 751.805(a).3  Neither TSCA nor the Proposed Rule defines the phrase “making available,” so 
we presume EPA intends for the phrase to carry its ordinary meaning. 
We are concerned that inclusion of the phrase “or making available” impermissibly 
expands the scope of conduct EPA may lawfully prohibit under its TSCA Section 6 authority to 
regulate “distribution in commerce.”  As explained in detail below, TSCA defines the phrases 
“distribute in commerce” and “distribution in commerce” to cover specific categories of conduct, 
all of which require that the regulated party have ownership or possession of the product.  
Conduct not involving elements of ownership or possession falls outside the definition and thus 
outside EPA’s regulatory authority.  Yet the Proposed Prohibitions’ ban on “making available” 
certain products appears designed to prohibit conduct where the retailer does not own or possess 
a product but, in some sense, may be said to be “making [it] available”—as may be the case, for 
example, where a marketplace services provider is used by a third party to offer a product for 
sale and process payment of the product without ever having title to or possession of the product.  
Indeed, the use of the disjunctive “or” between “distributing in commerce” and “making 
available” tacitly acknowledges that “making available” refers to activities not included within 
the category of “distributing in commerce,” and thus that the Proposed Prohibitions apply to a 
broader scope of activities.4  This expansion of the statutory phrase “distribute in commerce” is 
unlawful.  
Section 6 of TSCA authorizes EPA to “prohibit[] or otherwise restrict[] the . . .  
distribution in commerce” of certain chemicals to the extent necessary to prevent those 
 
2 89 Fed. Reg. at 65,116 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 751.805(b)(4)) (emphasis added).  
3 89 Fed. Reg. at 65,116 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 751.805(b)(5)) (emphasis added).  
4 Cf. New York Gaslight Club, Inc v. Carey, 447 U.S. 54, 61 (1980) (explaining that Section 706(k) of the Civil 
Rights Act, which allows attorney’s fee award in “any action or proceeding under this title,” applies to 
administrative proceedings because the alternative interpretation would construe “the words ‘or proceeding’ [as] 
mere surplusage”).   

 
Michal Freedhoff, PhD 
September 23, 2024 
Page 3 
 
chemicals from presenting an unreasonable risk of injury to health or to the environment.5  The 
terms “distribute in commerce” and “distribution in commerce” are defined in TSCA as follows: 
The terms “distribute in commerce” and “distribution in commerce” when used to 
describe an action taken with respect to a chemical substance or mixture or article 
containing a substance or mixture mean to sell, or the sale of, the substance, 
mixture, or article in commerce; to introduce or deliver for introduction into 
commerce, or the introduction or delivery for introduction into commerce of, the 
substance, mixture, or article; or to hold, or the holding of, the substance, mixture, 
or article after its introduction into commerce.6 
EPA’s authority to prohibit a person from “distributing in commerce” 1-BP (or products 
containing 1-BP) is thus limited to prohibiting conduct that falls within the statutory definition of 
that term—namely, (1) selling 1-BP; (2) introducing 1-BP, or delivering 1-BP for introduction, 
into commerce; or (3) holding 1-BP after its introduction into commerce.  Importantly, the well-
settled meaning of each of these terms requires that the person engaging in the activity have title 
to, or possession of, the product.    
First, a retailer cannot “sell” a product unless that retailer holds title to the product.  
“Selling” and “sales” are well-established common-law concepts, and TSCA thus presumptively 
incorporates their well-settled meanings.7  As numerous authorities recognize, the essential 
element of a “sale” is the transfer of title, and thus a party cannot “sell” a product—in other 
words, be a “seller”—unless that party holds title to the product.8  Many courts have thus 
determined that a marketplace service provider that never holds title to a product purchased 
 
5 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a)(1). Following the Supreme Court’s decision in Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo, 144 S. 
Ct. 2244 (2024), courts will “exercise independent judgment in construing” the statutory phrase “distribute in 
commerce.”  Id. at 2269.  Indeed, courts are already applying Loper Bright to rule against EPA statutory 
interpretations.  For example, the D.C. Circuit recently ruled against EPA on its own interpretations of the CAA. See 
United States Sugar Corp. v. Env’t Prot. Agency, No. 22-1271, 2024 WL 4019031, at *4 (D.C. Cir. Sept. 3, 2024) 
(“Instead of deferring to EPA’s interpretation of the Clean Air Act, we must apply what we regard as the statute’s 
‘best’ reading.”). 
6 15 U.S.C. § 2602(5). 
7 See Neder v. United States, 527 U.S. 1, 23 (1999) (recognizing the “rule that Congress intends to incorporate the 
well-settled meaning of the common-law terms it uses”). 
8 See, e.g., Amazon.com, Inc. v. McMillan, 625 S.W.3d 101, 108 (Tex. 2021) (explaining that the “common meaning 
of seller” is “someone who parts with title for a price”); Uniform Commercial Code § 2-106(1) (defining a “sale” as 
“the passing of title from the seller to the buyer for a price”); Restatement (Third) of Torts: Products Liability 
§ 20(a) (“One sells a product when, in a commercial context, one transfers ownership thereto either for use or 
consumption or for resale leading to ultimate use or consumption.”). Furthermore, the Restatement (Third) of Torts 
expressly recognizes that “product distribution facilitators”—i.e., “[p]ersons assisting or providing services to 
product distributors,” such as auctioneers, who thereby “facilitat[e] the commercial distribution of products”—are 
not “sellers.” Restatement (Third) of Torts: Products Liability § 20 cmt. g; accord McMillan, 625 S.W.3d at 107–08 
(“[T]hose that merely assist or facilitate sales—such as auctioneers, advertising agencies, newspapers, internet 
providers, and shipment companies—are not sellers.”). 

 
Michal Freedhoff, PhD 
September 23, 2024 
Page 4 
 
through its website cannot be held liable for the “sale” of such product.9  Moreover, Congress 
itself has recognized that online marketplace service providers do not “sell” products under the 
circumstances alleged here.  In the recently enacted INFORM Consumers Act, which deals 
specifically with e-commerce, Congress expressly distinguished between “online marketplaces” 
and “third party sellers.”10  Through these definitions, Congress recognized that where third 
parties sell products through an online marketplace, it is the third parties who “engage in the 
sale.”11  
Second, a retailer can “introduce” a product into commerce only if it holds title to the 
product.  Construed according to its plain meaning, the term “introduce” means “[t]o lead or 
bring in, esp. for the first time.”12  The ordinary meaning of the “introduction” of products “into 
commerce” thus involves bringing a product that is currently outside the stream of commerce 
and placing it into the stream of commerce.  Consequently, only a party who actually holds title 
to a product and decides to offer it for sale can thereby “introduce” it into commerce.  Case law 
applying substantively identical language from the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act 
(FDCA)13 supports this interpretation, holding that a good is “introduced” into “commerce” 
when its owner first acts with the “express purpose of sale.”14  Similarly, the term “deliver” also 
denotes physical possession.  
Third, a retailer must have possession of a product in order to “hold” it.  Like “deliver,” 
the ordinary meaning of “hold” requires possession.  As one court has observed, “[t]here are 
numerous dictionary definitions of ‘hold’ with one unifying characteristic: possession.  Indeed, 
Black’s Law Dictionary, Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary, and the Oxford English Dictionary all 
 
9 See, e.g., McMillan, 625 S.W.3d at 111; State Farm Fire & Cas. Co. v. Amazon.com, Inc., 835 F. App’x 213, 216 
(9th Cir. 2020); Normand v. Wal-Mart.com USA, LLC, 340 So. 3d 615, 626 (La. 2020); Erie Ins. Co. v. 
Amazon.com, Inc., 925 F.3d 135, 144 (4th Cir. 2019); Eberhart v. Amazon.com, Inc., 325 F. Supp. 3d 393, 397–98 
(S.D.N.Y. 2018).  
10 See generally Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2023, H.R. 2617, 117th Cong. Div. BB, Title III, § 301 (2022) 
(codified at 15 U.S.C. § 45f).  
11 See 15 U.S.C. § 45f(f)(4) (defining an “online marketplace,” in part, as a “consumer-directed electronically based 
or accessed platform” that “includes features that allow for, facilitate, or enable third party sellers to engage in the 
sale, purchase, payment, storage, shipping, or delivery of a consumer product in the United States” (emphasis 
added)). 
12 Introduce, Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary (1977).  
13 See 21 U.S.C. 331(a) (prohibiting the “introduction or delivery for introduction into interstate commerce of any 
food, drug, device, tobacco product, or cosmetic that is adulterated or misbranded”).  
14 United States v. Food, 2,998 Cases, 64 F.3d 984, 989 (5th Cir. 1995) (Canned mushrooms “were ‘introduced’ into 
interstate commerce—for the purpose of satisfying the statutory requirements [under the FDCA]—when they left 
Taiwan because they had been then injected into the mercantile stream and were on their way to a market in the 
United States where potential purchasers awaited.”); United States v. Eight Unlabeled Cases, More or Less, of an 
Article of Food, 909 F. Supp. 129, 131 (E.D.N.Y. 1995). 

 
Michal Freedhoff, PhD 
September 23, 2024 
Page 5 
 
refer to possession in defining ‘hold.’”15  The same was true of dictionaries at the time of 
TSCA’s enactment in 1976.16  
Inclusion of the phrase “or making available” in the Proposed Prohibitions appears 
designed to expand the scope of conduct beyond the categories covered by the statutory 
definition of “distribute in commerce.”  It suggests that certain commercial activities by parties 
that do not have title to, or possession of, 1-BP or products containing 1-BP are nevertheless 
within the scope of the prohibition.  For example, it suggests that an online marketplace service 
provider “makes available” 1-BP or a product containing 1-BP whenever the provider’s services 
are used by a third-party merchant to sell 1-BP or a product containing 1-BP, or whenever the 
provider engages in advertising or affiliate marketing for products containing 1-BP, even when 
the provider never has title to, or possession of, those products.  It likewise suggests that retailers 
generally may face liability for promotional activities even if the retailers themselves are not 
selling, holding, introducing into commerce, or delivering for introduction into commerce the 1-
BP or products containing 1-BP. 
Such an expansion of the statutorily-defined term “distribute in commerce” would exceed 
EPA’s authority.  “When Congress takes the trouble to define the terms it uses,” a court or 
agency “must respect its definitions as virtually conclusive.”17  This is true even when a statutory 
definition “varies from the term’s ordinary meaning.”18  Here, EPA has promulgated the 
Proposed Prohibitions under its Section 6 authority to “prohibit[] or otherwise restrict[] the . . . 
distribution in commerce” of chemicals found to pose an unreasonable risk to health or the 
environment.19  When exercising that authority, EPA may only regulate conduct falling within 
the express statutory definition of “distribution in commerce.”  That statutory definition, which 
covers only certain conduct involving ownership or possession of products, does not sweep as 
broadly as all conduct that may be deemed “making available” a product—a point EPA itself 
appears to acknowledge by setting off the phrase “making available” from the phrase “distributes 
in commerce” in the Proposed Prohibitions with the disjunctive “or.”20  Thus, the Proposed 
Prohibitions would, if adopted, be ultra vires.   
Further, insofar as the phrase “making available” includes within its scope online 
marketplaces that merely facilitate third-party merchants’ offer and sale of 1-BP products, the 
 
15 RealPage Inc. v. Nat'l Union Fire Ins. Co. of Pittsburgh, 521 F. Supp. 3d 645, 653 (N.D. Tex. 2021), aff'd, 21 
F.4th 294 (5th Cir. 2021) (citing those dictionary definitions).  
16 See, e.g., Hold, Black’s Law Dictionary (5th ed. 1979) (defining “hold,” in relevant part, as “[t]o keep; to retain; 
to maintain possession of or authority over”); Hold, Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary (1977) (“to maintain 
possession of”). 
17 Dep’t of Agric. Rural Dev. Rural Hous. Serv. v. Kirtz, 601 U.S. 42, 59 (2024) (cleaned up). 
18 Id. (cleaned up). 
19 15 U.S.C. § 2605(a)(1). 
20 89 Fed. Reg. at 65,116 (proposed 40 C.F.R. § 751.805(b)(4), (5)); see Campos-Chavez v. Garland, 144 S. Ct. 
1637, 1647 (2024) (“The word ‘or’ is almost always disjunctive, and is generally used to indicate an alternative.” 
(cleaned up)). 

 
Michal Freedhoff, PhD 
September 23, 2024 
Page 6 
 
Proposed Prohibitions would run afoul of Section 230 of the Communications Decency Act.21  
Section 230’s safe-harbor provision gives complete immunity from civil liability to a “provider 
or user of an interactive computer servicer” for liability arising from “information provided by 
another information content provider.”22  As courts have consistently held, when a third party 
sells a prohibited product on an online marketplace, the third-party seller is the relevant “content 
provider,” and the marketplace functions as neither a “publisher” nor a “speaker.”23  Section 230 
would thus preclude EPA from imposing liability on an online marketplace service provider 
based on such sales by third parties.  
Accordingly, EPA should remove the phrase “or making available” from the Proposed 
Prohibitions in the final rule so as to ensure the prohibition covers only conduct EPA is 
statutorily authorized to regulate. 
Strict Liability Concerns 
We are also concerned that the Proposed Rule’s imposition of strict liability on retailers 
for sales of products containing 1-BP does not appropriately allocate responsibility along the 
supply chain.  As applied to retailers, strict liability is an unreasonable standard because 
retailers—often many steps away from manufacturers in the supply chain—lack the information 
necessary to determine if the products sold in their stores contain 1-BP and face great difficulty 
in obtaining this information from upstream parties.24  It is thus extremely challenging for 
retailers to identify and remove potential sources of 1-BP from their supply chains.  The 
difficulty in identifying 1-BP in products is even greater for retailers with a large selection, or 
marketplace service providers that allow third parties to sell products in their store.25  A strict 
liability risk of this magnitude requires an unprecedented degree of supply chain visibility that is 
not currently possible and certainly not possible on the timelines EPA is considering.  In lieu of 
imposing strict liability on retailers, EPA should impose a reasonably ascertainable standard, 
provide a liability waiver to retailers relying on a certification of compliance, and allow retailers 
and other regulated parties to contractually allocate responsibility to relevant supply chain 
stakeholders.    
 
 
21 47 U.S.C. § 230. 
22 47 U.S.C. § 230(c)(1); see also Almeida v. Amazon.com, Inc., 456 F.3d 1316, 1321 (11th Cir. 2006) (“The 
majority of federal circuits have interpreted the CDA to establish broad federal immunity to any cause of action that 
would make service providers liable for information originating with a third-party user of the service.” (internal 
quotation marks omitted)). 
23 E.g., Chicago Lawyers’ Comm. for C.R. Under L, Inc. v. Craigslist, Inc., 519 F.3d 666, 671 (7th Cir. 2008); 
United States v. EZ Lynk, No. 21-cv-1986 (MKV), 2024 WL 1349224, at *11 (S.D.N.Y. March 28, 2024); Great N. 
Ins. Co. v. Amazon.com, Inc., 524 F. Supp. 3d 852, 859 (N.D. Ill. 2021). 
 
24 See, e.g., Amazon Servs. LLC v. Dep’t of Agriculture, 109 F.4th 573, 583 (D.C. Cir. 2024) (reversing agency’s 
conclusion that marketplace operator aided or abet third-party sellers’ unlawful import of plan and animal products 
law because “[t]here is no indication that Amazon was aware of the violations”). 
25 Cf. U.S. Sugar Corp. v. EPA, 2024 WL 4019031, at *6 (D.C. Cir. Sept. 3, 2024) (“[W]e should not lightly assume 
that a statute is draconian or demands the impossible.” (cleaned up)). 

 
Michal Freedhoff, PhD 
September 23, 2024 
Page 7 
 
The Proposed Rule’s prohibitions at 40 C.F.R. § 751.805(b) place the same liability on 
retailers who lack information critical to compliance as it does on manufacturers and other 
entities who have the information and means to comply.  This is an unreasonable standard for 
retailers, who rely on upstream business partners for information regarding the composition of 
products.  Because products typically have multi-tiered supply chains, retailers often have no 
visibility into—and, at best, limited influence against—companies that are several tiers removed 
from them.  Consequently, retailers’ ability to reduce the volume of 1-BP-containing products 
available in the stream of commerce is severely limited and inefficient.   
 
Rather than a strict liability standard, EPA should therefore apply a “known to or 
reasonably ascertainable” standard, which EPA has used elsewhere in TSCA where there were 
known information gaps beyond the control of the relevant party, just as there are here.  See, e.g., 
40 C.F.R. § 705.15 (requiring reporting of certain chemical information known to or reasonably 
ascertainable by a manufacturer or importer); id. § 710.25 (excusing manufacturers from 
reporting if information about prior production was not known to or reasonably ascertainable by 
the manufacturer); id. § 720.40 (requiring data submittal for new chemicals only to the extent 
such information is known to or reasonably ascertainable by the submitter).   
 
In addition, because retailers are so far removed from the production and processing of 1-
BP-containing products, EPA should provide a liability waiver for retailers and distributors 
relying in good faith on a representation of compliance from upstream parties.  For example, 
N.Y. Envtl. Conserv. Law § 37-1011 provides:  
 
No person that sells covered products shall be held in violation of this title if they 
can show that they relied in good faith on the written assurance of the manufacturer 
that such covered products met the requirements of this title.  Such written 
assurance shall take the form of a certificate of compliance stating that such covered 
product is in compliance with the requirements of this title[.] 
 
This or a similar approach would provide much-needed certainty to retailers conducting product 
due diligence and would simplify their efforts to meet EPA’s environmental and human health 
and safety goals.  Indeed, this concept has also been adopted in federal and other state laws.26     
 
To more appropriately allocate compliance responsibilities, EPA could also expressly 
permit retailers, manufacturers, processors, and distributors to contractually allocate 
responsibility with supply chain stakeholders for alleged and actual violations of the Proposed 
Rule.  In most cases, the manufacturers of 1-BP-containing products are in the best position to 
know if their products contain 1-BP; for example, the use of 1-BP may be designed into or 
mandated by the manufacturer of a product.  EPA should therefore amend the Proposed Rule to 
 
26 See e.g., 7 U.S.C. § 136j(b)(1) (waiving penalties for a guaranty of compliance under the Federal Insecticide, 
Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act); 21 U.S.C.A. § 333(c) (waiving penalties for a guaranty of compliance under the 
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act); Conn. Gen. Stat. Ann. § 22a-61(c)(1) (waiving penalties if purchaser 
provides guaranty of lawful pesticide). 

 
Michal Freedhoff, PhD 
September 23, 2024 
Page 8 
 
place responsibility for compliance on manufacturers, but allow the retailers, manufacturers, and 
other regulated parties to contractually reallocate responsibility to processors or first-line 
incorporators of 1-BP or 1-BP-containing products.  Allowing this contractual flexibility would 
prevent strict liability from being imposed unfairly on retailers and other parties who lack 
knowledge of the violative products, and would allow supply chain participants to concentrate 
compliance efforts directly on the source, resulting in a greater reduction of violative products 
from entering the stream of commerce. 
Compliance Deadlines 
Finally, we are also concerned that the Proposed Rule’s compliance period for retailers is 
neither reasonable nor feasible.  The proposed prohibitions would apply to retailers 15 months 
after publication of the final rule, but only three months after the proposed prohibition on 
distributing such products to retailers would take effect.27  Thus, under the proposal, retailers will 
effectively have three months to sell or remove all their 1-BP-containing inventory lest they face 
liability.28  Given that retailers do not move a high volume of products containing 1-BP, the 
proposed compliance period is unworkable and unreasonable.   
Instead of this cascade of compliance deadlines that ultimately places retailers at a 
disadvantage within the 1-BP supply chain, EPA should link the compliance date to a 
manufactured-by date and provide retailers at least a one-year sell-through period after the 
manufacture-by compliance date.   
A sell-through period for retailers is fully justified.  First, such a change would have no 
effect on EPA’s rightful goal of and timeline for restricting the actual source of new 1-BP in the 
U.S.—i.e., the manufacturers and processors.  A sell-through period also minimizes the potential 
for stranded inventory and for disruptive disputes along the supply chain.  Indeed, EPA has 
provided sell-through provisions in similar regulations.  For instance, in the final TSCA Section 
6 Formaldehyde Emissions Standards for Composite Wood Products, EPA permitted the sale of 
composite wood products manufactured before the manufacture-by date.29  Similarly, in the 
recently finalized Hydrofluorocarbons Technology Transitions Rule, EPA allowed for a three-
year sell-through period to “mitigate the costs of stranded inventory, storage, and product 
disposal.”30  “[T]he production and purchase of products or components that are unable to be 
sold to consumers is an economic and environmental outcome no parties desire.”31  The same 
concerns should prevail here. 
 
 
 
28 89 Fed. Reg. at 65,116 (proposed 40 C.F.R. §§ 751.805(b)(3)-(4)).  
29 81 Fed. Reg. 89,674, 89,710 (Dec. 12, 2016). 
30 88 Fed. Reg. 73,098, 73,123 (Oct. 24, 2023).   
31 88 Fed. Reg. at 73,123.   

 
Michal Freedhoff, PhD 
September 23, 2024 
Page 9 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
S

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0140 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
409 3rd Street SW / MC 3110 / Washington, DC 20416 
Ph 202-205-6533 / advocacy.sba.gov 
 
 
September 23, 2024 
 
VIA ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION 
 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re: 1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) 
(Docket ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0032) 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
 
On August 8, 2024, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published a proposed rule titled 
“1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA).”1 This 
letter constitutes the Office of Advocacy’s (Advocacy) public comments on the proposed rule. 
 
Advocacy is concerned with the ability of small businesses to comply with the EPA’s proposed 
workplace protection program for the use of 1-BP-containing products. Additionally, the 
economic analysis prepared by the EPA does not adequately reflect the impact of the proposed 
rule on small businesses. Advocacy recommends the EPA allow the continued use of 1-BP in 
industries that can prevent exposure risk and include longer compliance timelines for industries 
to comply with any prohibitions or new regulations. Further, Advocacy asks the EPA to 
reconsider the proposed existing chemical exposure limit (ECEL) in favor of a more attainable 
ECEL that would not place an unnecessary burden on small businesses.  
I. Background 
A. The Office of Advocacy 
Congress established the Office of Advocacy under Pub. L. 94-305 to represent the views of 
small entities before federal agencies and Congress. Advocacy is an independent office within 
the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) that seeks to ensure small business concerns are 
 
1 89 Fed. Reg. 65066 (Aug. 8, 2024).  

 
- 2 - 
heard in the federal regulatory process. Advocacy also works to ensure that regulations do not 
unduly inhibit the ability of small entities to compete, innovate, or comply with federal laws. The 
views expressed by Advocacy do not necessarily reflect the views of the SBA or the 
Administration.  
 
The Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA),2 as amended by the Small Business Regulatory 
Enforcement Fairness Act (SBREFA),3 gives small entities a voice in the rulemaking process. 
For all rules that are expected to have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of 
small entities, the RFA requires federal agencies to assess the impact of the proposed rule on 
small entities and to consider less burdensome alternatives.4 Additionally, Section 609 of the 
RFA requires the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, and the Environmental Protection Agency to conduct special outreach efforts 
through a review panel.5 The panel must carefully consider the views of the impacted small 
entities, assess the impact of the proposed rule on small entities, and consider less burdensome 
alternatives for small entities.6 If a rule will not have a significant economic impact on a 
substantial number of small entities, agencies may certify the rule.7 The agency must provide a 
statement of factual basis that adequately supports its certification.8 
 
The Small Business Jobs Act of 2010 requires agencies to give every appropriate consideration 
to comments provided by Advocacy.9 The agency must include a response to these written 
comments in any explanation or discussion accompanying the final rule’s publication in the 
Federal Register, unless the agency certifies that the public interest is not served by doing so.10 
 
Advocacy’s comments are consistent with Congressional intent underlying the RFA, that 
“[w]hen adopting regulations to protect the health, safety, and economic welfare of the nation, 
federal agencies should seek to achieve statutory goals as effectively and efficiently as possible 
without imposing unnecessary burdens on the public.”11 
B. The Proposed Rule  
On August 8, 2024, the EPA published a proposed rule to manage risk associated with the use of 
1-BP under the TSCA. 1-BP is used as a solvent in cleaning and degreasing applications, spray 
adhesives, dry cleaning, and insulation. The act requires that the EPA address and identify any 
unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment in a TSCA risk evaluation to the extent 
necessary that the chemical no longer presents an unreasonable risk.12 The EPA evaluated 25 
 
2 Pub. L. No. 96-354, 94 Stat. 1164 (1980) (codified at 5 U.S.C. §§ 601-612). 
3 Pub. L. No. 104-121, tit. II, 110 Stat. 857 (1996) (codified in scattered sections of 5 U.S.C. §§601-612). 
4 5 U.S.C. § 603. 
5 Id. § 609. 
6 Id. 
7 Id. § 605(b). 
8 Id. 
9 Small Business Jobs Act of 2010, Pub. L. No. 111-240, §1601, 214 Stat. 2551 (codified at 5 U.S.C. § 604). 
10 Id. 
11 Regulatory Flexibility Act, Pub. L. No. 96-354, 94 Stat. 1164 (1980) (codified at 5 U.S.C. §§ 601-612). 
12 15 U.S.C. §2605(a). 

 
- 3 - 
conditions of use of 1-BP and determined that all those conditions of use present an unreasonable 
risk of injury to health for workers and consumers. 
 
Based on these risk determinations, the EPA proposes to ban the manufacture, processing, and 
distribution of 1-BP for all consumer uses; prohibit the manufacture, processing, and distribution 
of 1-BP for four commercial uses; and require strict workplace and prescriptive controls for 
conditions of use where 1-BP is not banned. The workplace chemical protection program 
(WCPP) would apply to six conditions of use and includes the use of an existing chemical 
exposure limit (ECEL), a respiratory personal protective equipment (PPE) program, and the 
requirement to use chemical resistant gloves. The EPA is also proposing prescriptive controls for 
six conditions of use dictating the requirements for use of chemical-resistant gloves. Conditions 
of use subject to these regulations would also be required to provide self-certification of 
compliance with a WCPP to purchase and use 1-BP. The proposal also includes recordkeeping 
and downstream notification requirements consistent with other chemical risk management rules.  
 
The TSCA requires the EPA to discuss one or more primary alternative regulatory actions.13 In 
this case, the agency provides two alternative regulatory actions. The primary alternative 
includes a WCPP for several additional conditions of use and prohibitions instead of prescriptive 
controls for certain industries. It also provides longer compliance timeframes for prohibitions. 
The secondary alternative is to prohibit all occupational uses of 1-BP.  
 
In advance of this proposed rule, the EPA convened a small business advocacy review panel 
under SBREFA to consult with small entity representatives (SERs). The report issued by that 
panel is available in the docket.14  
II. Advocacy’s Small Business Concerns 
 
Advocacy has several concerns with the proposed rule. First, Advocacy is concerned that the 
EPA is exceeding its statutory authority under the TSCA by proposing to ban 1-BP for entities 
that can demonstrate the ability to comply with a WCPP. Second, Advocacy is concerned that 
some of the proposed policies, specifically the proposed ECEL, create a disproportionate impact 
on small businesses, potentially resulting in a de facto ban of the use of 1-BP for entities that 
could comply with a WCPP. Advocacy is concerned that the EPA is underestimating the costs of 
the rule and has not properly identified all the potential economic impacts to small businesses. 
Further, Advocacy remains concerned generally with the EPA’s approach to its risk management 
rules, and suggests the agency accept information submitted after the comment period.  
 
13 15 U.S.C. §2605(c)(2)(A)(iv)(II)-(III). 
14 U.S ENV’T PROT. AGENCY, FINAL REPORT OF THE SMALL BUSINESS ADVOCACY REVIEW PANEL ON EPA’S 
PLANNED PROPOSED RULE UNDER THE TOXIC SUBSTANCES CONTROL ACT (TSCA) SECTION 6(A) FOR 1-
BROMOPROPANE (1-BP) (Dec. 16, 2021), https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0066. 
 

 
- 4 - 
A. Advocacy recommends that the EPA allow the continued industrial and commercial use 
of 1-BP for industries that can prove compliance with the WCPP.  
As expressed in Advocacy’s public comments on the proposed risk management rules for 
methylene chloride, perchloroethylene, and n-Methylpyrollidone,15 Advocacy remains concerned 
about the EPA’s practice of prohibiting uses based on its independent determination about a 
business’s compliance capability with the WCPP. 
 
According to the TSCA, once the EPA determines that a chemical substance presents an 
unreasonable risk of injury to health or the environment, it must apply one or more requirements 
listed in section 6(a) “to the extent necessary so that the chemical substance or mixture no longer 
presents such risk.”16 In the proposal, the EPA determines that inhalation of 1-BP presents an 
unreasonable risk to human health.  
 
The EPA proposes to ban or implement prescriptive controls for many of the industrial uses of 1-
BP rather than allow the regulated entities to determine compliance feasibility. The EPA cites 
uncertainties regarding the feasibility of implementing workplace safety control measures and 
the availability of alternatives as reasons to prohibit or require prescriptive controls for the use of 
1-BP. It is important to note that the TSCA does not specify any level of certainty or compliance 
capability. It simply requires that the unreasonable risk must be addressed only to the extent 
necessary. Because the EPA has identified controls and WCPP requirements that could prevent 
exposure in some conditions of use, a user that can comply with these requirements should be 
able to eliminate unreasonable risk. Speculating about compliance capability goes beyond the 
scope of the statute.  
 
If a WCPP is indeed protective of health and the environment in certain uses, as the EPA claims, 
then banning those uses that can demonstrate compliance with the WCPP would go beyond the 
“extent necessary.” If a workplace can document and demonstrate compliance with a WCPP, 
such a use should be allowed to continue. Imposing regulations on a use that can meet the WCPP 
exceeds the agency’s statutory authority under the TSCA. Therefore, the EPA should not 
propose banning the use of 1-BP for entities that can demonstrate compliance with a WCPP. 
1. Advocacy recommends that the EPA address concerns with the proposed ECEL.  
Advocacy is concerned that the proposed ECEL of 0.05 parts per million (ppm) is too low to be 
reliably measured by most businesses and thus creates a de facto ban of the use of 1-BP. The 
 
15 U.S. Small Bus. Admin., Off. of Advocacy, Comment Letter on Proposed Rule for Methylene Chloride; 
Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) (July 3, 2023), 
https://advocacy.sba.gov/2023/07/03/advocacy-provides-public-comment-on-epas-proposed-risk-management-for-
methylene-chloride-under-the-toxic-substance-control-act/. U.S. Small Bus. Admin., Off. of Advocacy, Comment 
Letter on Proposed Rule Perchlororoethlyne (PCE); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) 
(Aug. 15, 2023), https://advocacy.sba.gov/2023/08/15/advocacy-provides-public-comment-on-epas-proposed-risk-
management-for-perchloroethylene-under-the-toxic-substance-control-act/.  U.S. Small Bus. Admin., Off. of 
Advocacy, Comment Letter on Proposed Rule Regulation under the Toxic Substances Control Act: n-
Methylyrrolidone) (July 29, 2024), https://advocacy.sba.gov/wp-content/uploads/2024/07/Comment-Letter-NMP-
Risk-Management-Under-TSCA-72624.pdf.  
16 15 U.S.C. §2605(a) (emphasis added). 

 
- 5 - 
EPA assumes that a regulated entity has the necessary means to detect those levels because the 
agency understands them to be above the detection limit. However, Advocacy spoke with several 
small businesses that expressed their disagreement with this assumption. This was also discussed 
in the Small Business Advocacy Review (SBAR) Panel convened in 2021, where several SERs 
discussed the challenges associated with achieving an ECEL of 0.05 ppm, especially in vapor 
degreasing operations.17 
 
While there may be commercially available methods to detect an exposure at the proposed 
levels, it may be costly or burdensome to implement and may not be readily available to all 
potentially regulated entities at this time. Considering this feedback from small entities, 
Advocacy recommends that the EPA consider adjusting the requirements for the ECEL to allow 
more small entities in regulated industries to comply with the requirements of the WCPP.  
2. Advocacy recommends that the EPA provide a longer compliance timeframe for 
small entities.  
Advocacy is concerned that the EPA’s proposal does not provide a practicable compliance 
timeline for small entities. According to the TSCA, when the agency is contemplating a 
prohibition or a substantial restriction on the use of a chemical, it is required to set an appropriate 
transition period.18 To make this determination, “the Administrator shall consider, to the extent 
practicable, whether technically and economically feasible alternatives that benefit health or the 
environment, compared to the use so proposed to be prohibited or restricted, will be reasonably 
available as a substitute when the proposed prohibition or other restriction takes effect.”19 
 
Advocacy is concerned that the agency did not adequately account for the limited resources 
available to small entities to ensure timely compliance. The uses subject to prohibition will 
require additional time and costs for researching alternative processes or substitutes, securing 
financing for testing such alternatives, and implementing the use of an alternative into their 
process/product. Similarly, other small entities will have to utilize their limited staff and 
financial resources to implement procedures, equipment, and other necessities to comply with the 
proposed requirement of the WCPP. 
 
Several small businesses noted that the alternatives for 1-BP include fluorinated chemicals, 1,2-
trans-dichlorethylene, and per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). These businesses stated 
that while several industries have been moving away from the use of 1-BP for several years, 
there is concern that the alternative substances, all of which are currently in a regulation process 
from the EPA, would soon be subject to their own restrictions and/or bans. Additionally, many of 
these substances raise health and safety concerns for workers and/or the environment. For 
example, some alternatives are flammable, raising other safety concerns for workers in small 
businesses. Another alternative is a water-based solution, which could have additional 
environmental impacts on small businesses where water is not an abundant resource. Small 
 
17 U.S ENV’T PROT. AGENCY, supra note 14. 
18 15 U.S.C. § 2605(c)(2)(a)(iv)(I). 
19 Id. § 2605(a). 

 
- 6 - 
businesses are hesitant to invest significant time and resources into these alternatives if they are 
also going to be regulated or prohibited in the future.  
 
Further, as noted in this letter, Advocacy does not believe that the costs associated with 
alternative substances have been fully evaluated by the EPA. The SBAR panel report notes that 
costs of these substances can be 3 to 4 times the cost of 1-BP, not including any investment in 
different machinery that would be required to perform the same function with the new 
chemical.20 Therefore, Advocacy urges the EPA to consider the amount of time and resources 
necessary to adopt alternative solutions and methods for the uses of 1-BP identified in this rule.  
B. Advocacy recommends that the EPA consider all important adverse effects of the 
proposed rulemaking. 
Under the TSCA, the EPA is obligated to consider the reasonably ascertainable economic 
consequences of the rule, including the likely effect of the rule on the national economy, small 
businesses, technological innovation, the environment, and public health.21 The EPA is also 
obligated to assess the impact of the proposed rule on small entities and to consider less 
burdensome alternatives in a proposed rule. Advocacy is concerned that the EPA’s economic 
analysis underestimates the impact to small businesses by failing to include costs small 
businesses might incur when switching away from 1-BP to other alternative solvents. For 
example, under some conditions of use, the EPA does not include cost estimates beyond rule 
familiarization. Although alternative solvents for 1-BP exist, there are costs associated with 
switching to these solvents including the potential need for new machinery, protections against 
flammable substances, and a higher cost per liter for the alternative chemical solvent as well as 
costs whenever a change in procedure occurs, such as employee training.22 Advocacy 
recommends that the EPA consider all costs associated with the proposals in this rule prior to 
finalizing the regulation.  
 
Further, for four conditions of use related to processing, the EPA estimates costs but no benefits 
from the proposals in this rule. While a reduction in noncancer risks could not be quantified, it 
should decrease proportionally to quantified cancer risk. This suggests that these industries have 
managed to handle the risk of using 1-BP in a way that does not contribute to cancer risks, such 
as by using protections to prevent inhalation or dermal contact with 1-BP. Based on the 
economic impact for these conditions of use, Advocacy recommends that these conditions of use 
be subject to a WCPP instead of prescriptive controls or a total prohibition. 
C. Advocacy recommends that the EPA adjust aspects of the risk management process to 
be more inclusive of small business concerns.  
The EPA should consider allowing regulated entities to submit requested data after the public 
comment period has closed. This issue has been consistently raised by small businesses for this 
 
20 U.S ENV’T PROT. AGENCY, supra note 14. 
21 15 U.S.C. §2605(c)(2)(A)(iv)(I).  
22 U.S ENV’T PROT. AGENCY, supra note 14. 
 

 
- 7 - 
rule and others due to the limited public comment period of 45 days. Advocacy recognizes the 
legitimate concerns for the regulated entities to review and respond to rulemaking of a massive 
scope which will significantly impact most industrial and commercial uses of a widely used 
chemical. Advocacy also understands that the EPA has publicly stated they will not be extending 
comment periods for the TSCA risk management rules. However, Advocacy urges the agency to 
remain open to receiving additional feedback from the regulated entities in response to its 
proposal.   
 
In particular, the proposed rule indicates that the EPA is looking for specific data to support a 
proposal or alternative regulatory action. This includes the request for technical information that 
would indicate with certainty that relevant regulated entities for these conditions of use could 
sufficiently mitigate identified unreasonable risk for complying with elements of the WCPP. 
However, generating such responsive data and aggregating relevant information may require 
more than the 45 days provided for public comments. Therefore, Advocacy recommends that the 
agency develop a line of communication that allows for additional information to be considered 
by the agency before developing its final rule. By doing so, the EPA can ensure that all relevant 
data and perspectives are thoroughly evaluated, leading to a more comprehensive and effective 
final rule.   
 
1. Advocacy remains concerned that the EPA’s chemical risk management rules do 
not align with other rulemakings the agency is undertaking.  
Advocacy spoke with several small businesses that stated concerns that the identified alternatives 
to 1-BP, specifically for precision cleaning and vapor degreasing, are also substances that are 
likely to be regulated or prohibited by the EPA in the coming years. These include 1,2-trans-
dichlorethylene, for which the EPA released a final scoping document for risk evaluation in 
August 2020,23 as well as fluorinated substances and substances that are believed to be PFAS. 
Small business stakeholders identified concerns that the large investment in moving to these 
substances—many of which require new equipment, are more expensive, and are potentially 
flammable—deterred small businesses from switching to alternative substances as they may be 
subject to a different prohibition soon. As the EPA works through high priority chemicals, 
Advocacy encourages the agency to consider other potential regulations that may impact 
proposed alternatives prior to finalizing any rules.  
III.  
Conclusion 
Advocacy is concerned that the agency’s proposal exceeds its statutory authority by prohibiting 
commercial and industrial uses of 1-BP in a way that disproportionately impacts small entities. 
As noted in the final report of the SBAR panel, Advocacy strongly recommends that the EPA 
allow the use of 1-BP by entities who can prove compliance with the requirements of a WCPP. 
This includes not finalizing policies that might indirectly create a barrier to the safe use of 1-BP, 
such as an ECEL that is so restrictive it creates a de facto ban on the use of 1-BP. 
 
 
23 U.S ENV’T PROT. AGENCY, FINAL SCOPE OF THE RISK EVALUATION FOR TRANS-1,2-DICHLORETHYLENE, (Sept. 4, 
2020), https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2018-0465-0042.  

 
- 8 - 
Advocacy recommends the EPA reconsider the proposed rule, and urges the agency to consider 
feedback from small businesses on these important issues. 
 
If you have any questions or require additional information, please contact me or Assistant Chief 
Counsel Emily Jones at (202) 205-6368 or by email at Emily.Jones@sba.gov. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Major L. Clark, III 
Deputy Chief Counsel 
Office of Advocacy 
U.S. Small Business Administration 
 
 
 
Emily Jones 
Assistant Chief Counsel  
Office of Advocacy 
U.S. Small Business Administration 
 
 
 
Copy to: Richard L. Revesz, Administrator   
 
  Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs   
 
  Office of Management and Budget

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0155 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
September 23rd, 2024 
 
Comments from University of California, San Francisco Program on Reproductive Health 
and the Environment on the 1-Bromopropane (1-BP) Proposed Rule under the Toxic 
Substances Control Act (TSCA) 
  
Submitted online via Regulations.gov to docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
 
These comments are submitted on behalf of the University of California, San Francisco Program 
on Reproductive Health and the Environment. We declare collectively that we have no direct or 
indirect financial or fiduciary interest in any chemical or product that is the subject of these 
comments. Institutional affiliations are included for identification purposes only and do not 
imply institutional endorsement or support, unless indicated otherwise.  
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide written comments on EPA’s proposed rule for 1-
bromopropane (1-BP) (hereafter referred to as the 1-BP Proposed Risk Management Rule)1 
issued under the Toxic Substances Control Act (“TSCA”), which requires EPA to evaluate 
chemical risks based on the “best available science.”2 1-BP is associated with serious health 
harms, and millions of pounds of 1-BP are manufactured in the US each year. 1-BP is primarily 
used as an industrial and commercial solvent in applications like cleaning and degreasing, dry 
cleaning, and as insulation for building materials. 1-BP is also used in consumer products, 
including spot cleaners, stain removers, and arts and crafts materials. EPA has identified both 
cancer and non-cancer health hazards of 1-BP exposure, including skin and lung cancers, as well 
as adverse renal, liver, nervous system, and reproductive effects.3 
 
In the 1-BP Proposed Risk Management Rule, EPA continued to rely on the flawed “Margin of 
Exposure” (MOE) approach to non-cancer risk quantification that violates TSCA’s “best 
available science” requirement. While EPA found that liver, kidney, developmental, reproductive 
and neurological toxicity are likely hazards of 1-BP, it failed to provide quantitative estimates of 
those non-cancer risks. We applied methods developed by the World Health Organization 
(“WHO”) to quantify the non-cancer risk of developmental and neurological harm from chronic 
1-BP inhalation exposure, and found that exposures that EPA previously determined result in 
“negligible concerns for adverse human health effects” produced an upper bound risk of 1-in-100 
for developmental harm and 1-in-333 for neurological harm, risk levels 10,000 and 3,000 times 
higher, respectively, than the target risk level that EPA typically applies for protection of 
carcinogenic risks (1-in-1,000,000). Exposure at EPA’s proposed existing chemical exposure 
limit (“ECEL”) produces a 1-in-1,000 risk level for developmental harm, and a greater than 1-in-
10,000 risk level for neurological harm.4 These risks also far exceed EPA’s usual target risk level 
for carcinogenic risks of 1-in-1,000,000.   
 
1 1-Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA). Proposed Rule. 89 FR 
65066, August 8, 2024. 
215 U.S.C. § 2625(h).    
3 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide). 
4 1-Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA). Proposed Rule. 89 FR 
65066, August 8, 2024. 

Accordingly, EPA must make extensive revisions to the 1-BP Proposed Risk Management Rule 
to more accurately characterize real-world risks, including adopting best available scientific 
methods that more accurately quantify non-cancer risks.  
 
Our detailed comments on the 1-BP Proposed Risk Management Rule address the following 
issues: 
 
1. EPA failed to apply best available methods to generate quantitative risk estimates 
for varying levels of exposure to 1-BP for multiple liver, kidney, developmental, 
reproductive and neurological endpoints.  
 
We appreciate the opportunity to provide public input. Please do not hesitate to contact us with  
any questions regarding these comments.  
 
Sincerely, 
 
Daniel Axelrad, MPP 
Independent Consultant 
Washington, DC 
 
Rashmi Joglekar, PhD 
Associate Director, Science and Policy 
Program on Reproductive Health and the Environment 
University of California, San Francisco 
 
Abena BakenRa, MPH 
Science Associate, Science and Policy 
Program on Reproductive Health and the Environment 
University of California, San Francisco 
 
Emily Lasher, MPH 
Science Associate, Science and Policy 
Program on Reproductive Health and the Environment 
University of California, San Francisco 
 
Jessica Trowbridge, PhD, MPH 
Associate Research Scientist, Science and Policy 
Program on Reproductive Health and the Environment 
University of California, San Francisco 
 
Tracey Woodruff, PhD, MPH 
Director 
Program on Reproductive Health and the Environment 
University of California, San Francisco 
 
 

1. EPA should apply best available methods to generate quantitative risk estimates for 
varying levels of exposure to 1-BP for multiple liver, kidney, developmental, 
reproductive and neurological endpoints.  
 
The 1-BP Proposed Risk Management Rule continues to rely on scientifically-deficient methods 
for non-cancer dose-response analysis and risk characterization employed in previous TSCA risk 
evaluations and proposed risk management rules. EPA’s methods for non-cancer risk evaluation 
do not provide a quantitative estimate of risk. Instead, they rely on calculation of a margin of 
exposure (“MOE”), defined as: 
 
Margin of Exposure = Non-cancer point of departure / Human exposure.5 
 
The MOE approach is a scientifically inappropriate approach for characterizing risk and is 
inconsistent with TSCA’s requirements to use the “best available science”6 and to 
ensure protection of “potentially exposed and susceptible subpopulations” (“PESS”).7  
 
Use of the MOE, which relies on a point of departure (“POD”) with no extrapolation to lower 
doses, is a simplistic approach that only examines the ratio of the POD to the exposure level and 
determines whether this ratio is “interpreted as a potential human health concern” or if it 
“indicated negligible concerns for adverse human health effects.”8 The MOE does not estimate 
the proportion of the exposed population projected to experience a specified health endpoint or 
the number of individuals affected, and it perpetuates the scientifically flawed notion that a 
“safe” or “no risk” level of chemical exposure can be identified for a diverse exposed 
population.9,10 The National Academies11 and the World Health Organization (“WHO”)12,13 have 
outlined more robust methods for risk estimation that more accurately account for variability and 
 
5 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), p. 242. 
6 15 U.S.C §2625 (h). 
7 15 U.S.C §2602 (12). 
8 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), p. 243. 
9 Woodruff, T. J., Rayasam, S. D. G., Axelrad, D. A., Koman, P. D., Chartres, N., Bennett, D. H., Birnbaum, L. S., 
Brown, P., Carignan, C. C., Cooper, C., Cranor, C. F., Diamond, M. L., Franjevic, S., Gartner, E. C., Hattis, D., 
Hauser, R., Heiger-Bernays, W., Joglekar, R., Lam, J., ...Zeise, L. (2023). A science-based agenda for health-
protective chemical assessments and decisions: overview and consensus statement. Environ Health, 21(Suppl 1), 
132. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-022-00930-3.  
10 McGartland, A., Revesz, R., Axelrad, D. A., Dockins, C., Sutton, P., Woodruff, T. J. (2017). Estimating the health 
benefits of environmental regulations. Science, 357(6350), 457-458. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aam8204.  
11 National Research Council (2009). Science and Decisions: Advancing Risk Assessment, Chapter 5. 
12 World Health Organization, International Programme on Chemical Safety (2017). Guidance document on 
evaluating and expressing uncertainty in hazard characterization, 2nd edition. 
13 Chiu WA, Slob W.  A Unified Probabilistic Framework for Dose–Response Assessment of Human Health Effects.  
Environmental Health Perspectives, 2015 December;123(12): 1241–1254.  doi:10.1289/ehp.1409385. 

vulnerability across the human population and have been demonstrated in published case 
studies.14,15,16,17 
 
We applied the WHO methodology to estimate risks of adverse effects from chronic inhalation 
exposure to 1-BP using EPA’s identification of hazards and estimation of points of 
departure (PODs). Specifically, we estimated risks of decreased brain weight (a developmental 
effect), and decreased traction time (a neurological effect that is an indicator of reduced muscle 
strength).  We found that: 
 
• 0.17 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which 
decreased brain weight is expected in 1% of the exposed population, and 0.29 ppm is 
the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which decreased 
traction time is expected in 1% of the exposed population. 
• 0.06 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which 
decreased brain weight is expected in 0.1% of the exposed population, and 0.10 ppm 
is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which decreased 
traction time is expected in 0.1% of the exposed population. 
• 0.03 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which 
decreased brain weight is expected in 0.01% (1-in-10,000) of the exposed population, 
and 0.04 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at 
which decreased traction time is expected in 0.01% (1-in-10,000) of the exposed 
population. 
• 0.01 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which 
decreased brain weight is expected in 0.001% (1-in-100,000) of the exposed 
population, and 0.02 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation 
exposure at which decreased traction time is expected in 0.001% (1-in-100,000) of 
the exposed population. 
 
The implications of these risk values can be understood by comparison with the exposure levels 
considered by EPA to represent negligible risk in the Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane and 
comparison with EPA’s proposed workplace exposure limits. The lowest non-cancer POD in 
EPA’s risk evaluation is 17 ppm and has a benchmark MOE of 100,18 meaning that EPA 
concludes for non-cancer outcomes that there are “negligible concerns for adverse human health 
 
14 Nielsen, G. H., Heiger-Bernays, W. J., Levy, J. I., White, R. F., Axelrad, D. A., Lam, J., Chartres, N., 
Abrahamsson, D. P., Rayasam, S. D. G., Shaffer, R. M., Zeise, L., Woodruff, T. J., Ginsberg, G. L. (2023). 
Application of probabilistic methods to address variability and uncertainty in estimating risks for non-cancer health 
effects. Environ Health, 21(Suppl 1), 129. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-022-00918-z. 
15 Chiu WA, Axelrad DA, Dalaijamts C, Dockins C, Shao K, Shapiro AJ, Paoli G.  Beyond the RfD: broad 
application of a probabilistic approach to improve chemical dose-response assessment for non-cancer effects. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 2018 June;126(6):067009. doi:10.1289/EHP3368.  
16 Blessinger T, Davis A, Chiu WA, Stanek J, Woodall GM, Gift J, Thayer KA, Bussard D. Application of a unified 
probabilistic framework to the dose-response assessment of acrolein.  Environment International, 2020 
October;143:105953. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2020.105953.  
17 Ginsberg, G. L. (2012). Cadmium risk assessment in relation to background risk of chronic kidney disease. J 
Toxicol Environ Health A, 75(7),374-390. https://doi.org/10.1080/15287394.2012.670895.  
18 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), Table 3-2. 

effects”19 for any 1-BP exposure below 0.17 ppm (17 ppm / 100 = 0.17 ppm).  Our analysis 
indicates that an exposure of 0.17 ppm is equal to the lower-bound dose for the 1% (1-in-100) 
risk level for decreased brain weight, and is equal to the lower-bound dose for the 0.3% (1-in-
333) risk level for decreased traction time. These risks far exceed EPA’s usual target range of 
protection for carcinogenic risks of 1-in-10,000 to 1-in-1,000,000.20 
 
EPA has proposed an existing chemical exposure limit (“ECEL”) of 0.05 ppm, which it says 
“represents the concentration at which an adult human, including a member of a PESS, would be 
unlikely to suffer adverse effects if exposed for a working lifetime” and “will eliminate any 
unreasonable risk of injury to health from occupational inhalation exposures.”21  Our analysis 
indicates that an exposure of 0.05 ppm is just below the lower-bound dose for the 0.1% (1-in-
1,000) risk level for decreased brain weight, and is greater than the lower-bound dose for the 
0.01% (1-in-10,000) risk level for decreased traction time. These risks also exceed EPA’s usual 
target range of protection for carcinogenic risks of 1-in-10,000 to 1-in-1,000,000.22   
 
To better inform the final rule, EPA should apply the WHO framework to estimate risks of a 
range of kidney, liver and reproductive endpoints, as well as additional developmental and 
neurological endpoints. EPA’s final rule should target any upper bound risks of noncancer 
effects from 1-BP exposure to be no more than the 1-in-1,000,000 risk level.   
 
 
 
 
19 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), p. 243. 
20 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), p. 320. 
21 1-Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA).  Proposed Rule.  89 FR 
65066, August 8, 2024. 
22 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), p. 320. 

Technical Appendix:  Application of IPCS framework to 1-BP non-cancer risks 
 
In the Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane, EPA identified multiple hazards of 1-bromopropane 
(1-BP), including liver, kidney, reproductive, developmental and neurological effects. For risk 
characterization of these non-cancer health effects, EPA calculated a “margin of exposure” 
(MOE) for each condition of use, which is the ratio of the point of departure (POD) to the 
exposure level.  For most effects of 1-BP, the risk evaluation concluded that a “benchmark 
MOE” of 100 or greater “indicated negligible concerns for adverse human health effects.”23   
 
EPA’s approach to risk characterization does not actually estimate risks of adverse effects in the 
population, but instead simply applies a “bright line” judgment of whether or not the MOE is 
adequate.  A more informative approach for both risk characterization and risk management 
would be to apply the probabilistic dose-response assessment methods of the International 
Programme on Chemical Safety (IPCS),24 part of the World Health Organization (WHO), to 
estimate the risk of adverse effects at various levels of exposure.  The IPCS methodology has 
previously been described and applied in several peer-reviewed journal articles.25,26,27,28,29   
 
We applied the IPCS approach for “quantal-deterministic” and continuous endpoints and the 
“approximate probabilistic” calculation (see IPCS report Fig 3.5, panel C)30 to estimate risks of 
two selected 1-BP endpoints:  decreased brain weight (a developmental effect), and decreased 
traction time (a neurological effect that is an indicator of reduced muscle strength).  The IPCS 
framework is equally applicable to any endpoint identified by EPA in Table 3-2 of the 1-BP risk 
evaluation, and EPA should upgrade its evaluation of 1-BP risks using the IPCS methodology to 
better inform its final risk management rule by estimating risks of a range of kidney, liver and 
reproductive endpoints, as well as additional developmental and neurological endpoints.   
 
The analysis of decreased brain weight and decreased traction time for 1-BP involved the 
following steps: 
 
 
23 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), p. 243. 
24 World Health Organization, International Programme on Chemical Safety (2017). Guidance document on 
evaluating and expressing uncertainty in hazard characterization, 2nd edition. 
25 Chiu WA, Slob W.  A Unified Probabilistic Framework for Dose–Response Assessment of Human Health Effects.  
Environmental Health Perspectives, 2015 December;123(12): 1241–1254.  doi:10.1289/ehp.1409385. 
26 Nielsen, G. H., Heiger-Bernays, W. J., Levy, J. I., White, R. F., Axelrad, D. A., Lam, J., Chartres, N., 
Abrahamsson, D. P., Rayasam, S. D. G., Shaffer, R. M., Zeise, L., Woodruff, T. J., Ginsberg, G. L. (2023). 
Application of probabilistic methods to address variability and uncertainty in estimating risks for non-cancer health 
effects. Environ Health, 21(Suppl 1), 129. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12940-022-00918-z.   
27 Chiu WA, Axelrad DA, Dalaijamts C, Dockins C, Shao K, Shapiro AJ, Paoli G.  Beyond the RfD: broad 
application of a probabilistic approach to improve chemical dose-response assessment for non-cancer effects. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 2018 June;126(6):067009.  doi:10.1289/EHP3368.  
28 Blessinger T, Davis A, Chiu WA, Stanek J, Woodall GM, Gift J, Thayer KA, Bussard D. Application of a unified 
probabilistic framework to the dose-response assessment of acrolein.  Environment International, 2020 
October;143:105953. doi: 10.1016/j.envint.2020.105953.   
29 Chiu WA, Paoli GM.  Recent Advances in Probabilistic Dose–Response Assessment to Inform Risk-Based 
Decision Making. Risk Analysis, 2021 April;41(4):596-609. doi: 10.1111/risa.13595. 
30 World Health Organization, International Programme on Chemical Safety (2017). Guidance document on 
evaluating and expressing uncertainty in hazard characterization, 2nd edition. 

1. Derivation of IPCS POD and corresponding uncertainty adjustments 
2. Application of interspecies adjustments 
3. Application of intraspecies adjustments 
4. Calculation of HDMI - the human dose (HD) of 1-BP associated with a particular 
magnitude of effect M at a particular population incidence I.   
For each aspect of the analysis, including the values used to derive the IPCS POD and the 
adjustment factors applied to derive the HDMI, the IPCS methodology uses a 50th percentile value 
(P50) as a central estimate and the ratio of 95th percentile to 50th percentile (P95/P50) as a 
measure of uncertainty.  For each endpoint, we derive a set of inhalation HDMI values for 
different levels of population incidence (e.g. 1%, 0.1%, etc.).  All POD and HDMI values 
presented in this analysis are for 8-hour time-weighted averages (8-hr TWA). 
 
STEP 1:  Derivation of IPCS POD and corresponding uncertainty adjustments 
 
The IPCS methodology classifies each toxicity endpoint into one of three categories:  continuous 
endpoints, quantal-deterministic endpoints, and quantal-stochastic endpoints.  Procedures for 
determining the IPCS POD differ across these categories, and also differ depending on whether 
the POD provided by EPA is a benchmark dose (BMD), no-observed-adverse-effect level 
(NOAEL), or lowest-observed-adverse-effect level (LOAEL).  Because of these differences, we 
present the derivation of the IPCS POD separately for each of the two endpoints analyzed.  
a. IPCS POD for decreased brain weight 
EPA’s risk evaluation for 1-BP states that there was no adequate fit to the data for any BMD 
model for decreased brain weight in adult F1 males,31 and presents a duration-adjusted LOAEL 
of 110 ppm as the POD.32 
 
Decreased brain weight is considered a quantal-deterministic endpoint in the IPCS framework.    
The IPCS methodology requires the use of an ED50 (median effective dose) value as the POD for 
quantal-deterministic endpoints.  Since an ED50 is not available from the EPA risk evaluation, we 
applied adjustments provided by the IPCS methodology to derive an ED50 from a LOAEL.  The 
first adjustment applies a factor to convert the LOAEL to a NOAEL.  For this adjustment, Chiu 
et al. 2018 recommends applying as a central estimate (P50) the traditional LOAEL-to-NOAEL 
uncertainty factor reported in the existing EPA assessment, which in this instance was a factor of 
10, and a P95/P50 ratio representing uncertainty equal to 3.33   
 
 
31 U.S. EPA (2020). Final Risk Evaluation for1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), Supplemental Information on 
Human Health Benchmark Dose Modeling, p. 94. 
32 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), Table 3-2. 
33 Chiu WA, Axelrad DA, Dalaijamts C, Dockins C, Shao K, Shapiro AJ, Paoli G.  Beyond the RfD: broad 
application of a probabilistic approach to improve chemical dose-response assessment for non-cancer effects. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 2018 June;126(6):067009. Figure 4. doi:10.1289/EHP3368.    

The second adjustment is to then apply a factor to convert the NOAEL to an ED50.  For quantal-
deterministic endpoints, the IPCS recommends a central estimate (P50) of 2/9 and a P95/P50 
ratio representing uncertainty equal to 5.34  
 
The median (P50) estimate of the ED50 is then derived by dividing the LOAEL by the two 
adjustment factors (P50).  The uncertainty adjustments (P95/P50) for each POD aspect are 
combined into a composite P95/P50 value.   In the IPCS approximate probabilistic calculation 
template, those values are entered as follows: 
 
Determination of point of departure (POD) and its uncertaintya  
for probabilistic dose-response analysis of  
chronic 1-BP inhalation:  Decreased brain weight in adult F1 males 
Aspect 
P50 
P95/P50 
LOAEL 
110 ppm 
1 
AFLOAEL-to-NOAELb 
10 
3 
AFNOAEL-to-ED50c 
0.22 
5 
IPCS POD = ED50 
49.5 ppm 
7.02d 
a Uncertainty is expressed as the ratio of the 95th percentile (P95) to the 50th percentile (P50). 
b The EPA risk evaluation applied a LOAEL-to-NOAEL adjustment factor of 10 for this endpoint.   
c World Health Organization, International Programme on Chemical Safety (2017). Guidance document on 
evaluating and expressing uncertainty in hazard characterization, 2nd edition, Table 4.1.  
d (Composite P95/P50) = 10^[(log 1)2 + (log 3)2 + (log 5)2]0.5 = 7.02 
 
b. IPCS POD for decreased traction time 
For decreased traction time, a continuous endpoint, EPA conducted BMD modeling and derived 
a benchmark concentration (BMC) of 37 ppm and lower confidence limit on the BMC (BMCL) 
of 18 ppm.35  EPA applied a duration adjustment to the BMCL to estimate a POD of 25 ppm.36 
 
For continuous endpoints, the IPCS framework uses the BMC as the P50 value.  We applied the 
outcome of EPA’s duration adjustment to the BMC to arrive at a duration-adjusted BMC: 
 
BMCadj = BMC x (BMCLadj / BMCL) = 37 ppm x (25 ppm / 18 ppm) = 51 ppm  
 
 
34 World Health Organization, International Programme on Chemical Safety (2017). Guidance document on 
evaluating and expressing uncertainty in hazard characterization, 2nd edition, Table 4.1.  
35 U.S. EPA (2020). Final Risk Evaluation for1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), Supplemental Information on 
Human Health Benchmark Dose Modeling, Table 2-91. 
36 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), Table 3-2. 

Uncertainty in the BMC is represented by the ratio of 95th percentile to 50th percentile (P95/P50), 
which is equal to the ratio of BMC / BMCL.  In this case, P95/P50 = BMC / BMCL = 37 ppm / 
18 ppm = 2.06.   
 
These values are entered in the IPCS approximate probabilistic calculation template as follows: 
 
Determination of point of departure (POD) and its uncertaintya  
for probabilistic dose-response analysis of  
chronic 1-BP inhalation:  Decreased traction time 
Aspect 
P50 
P95/P50 
IPCS POD = BMCb 
51 ppm 
2.06 
a Uncertainty is expressed as the ratio of the 95th percentile (P95) to the 50th percentile (P50). 
b EPA duration adjustment applied to reported BMC of 37 ppm to obtain P50 value of 51 ppm; P95/P50 ratio = 
BMC/BMCL.  Since decreased traction time is a continuous endpoint, no factors for extrapolation to ED50 are 
applied. 
 
 
Step 2:  Application of interspecies (animal-to-human) adjustments 
 
For interspecies (animal-to-human) adjustments, the IPCS methodology first considers a factor 
for body-size scaling (AFInterspecies-BS), and then a factor for remaining toxicokinetic (TK) and 
toxicodynamic (TD) differences (AFInterspecies-TK/TD).  For inhalation studies, the IPCS P50 value for 
body-size scaling is equal to 1 / regional gas dose ratio (RGDR), and the P95/P50 value is equal 
to 2.37  EPA applied a RGDR = 1,38 therefore the P50 value in this case is 1.   
 
For the TK/TD differences remaining after body size scaling, the IPCS report recommends a 
central estimate (P50) of 1 (i.e., no additional interspecies differences) and representing 
uncertainty with a P95/P50 factor of 3.39  This recommendation corresponds to a default case in 
which EPA applies a residual interspecies uncertainty factor of 3 after applying the dosimetric 
adjustment based on the RGDR.  For 1-BP, however, EPA applied an interspecies uncertainty 
factor (UFA) of 10 after the dosimetric adjustment: 
 
an UFA of 10 is retained to account for additional toxicokinetic differences that remain 
unaccounted for. 1-BP is irritating to the respiratory tract and rodents exhibit 
physiological responses (such as reflex bradypnea) that differ from humans and may alter 
uptake due to hyper- or hypoventilation, resulting in decreased internal dose in rodents 
relative to the applied concentration. Therefore, an UFA of 10 is retained to account for 
toxicokinetic differences.40 
 
37 World Health Organization, International Programme on Chemical Safety (2017). Guidance document on 
evaluating and expressing uncertainty in hazard characterization, 2nd edition, Table 4.6. 
38 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), Table 3-2., note 4. 
39 World Health Organization, International Programme on Chemical Safety (2017). Guidance document on 
evaluating and expressing uncertainty in hazard characterization, 2nd edition, Table 4.3. 
40 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), pp. 214-215. 

To account for EPA’s interspecies adjustment in the IPCS framework, we similarly set the 
P95/P50 value for AFInterspecies-TK/TD equal to 10. 
 
The interspecies adjustment factors are entered In the IPCS approximate probabilistic calculation 
template as follows: 
 
Interspecies adjustments for probabilistic dose-response analysis of  
chronic oral exposure to 1-BP 
Aspect 
P50 
P95/P50 
AFInterspecies-BSa 
1 
2 
AFInterspecies-TK/TDb 
1 
10 
a IPCS Table 4.6, incorporating EPA RGDR of 1.   
b P95/P50 value of 10 corresponds to EPA’s use of interspecies factor of 10, rather than 3, 
after application of body size default adjustment factor. 
 
Step 3:  Application of intraspecies (human variability) adjustments  
 
In the IPCS methodology, the value of the human variability adjustment factor (AFintraspecies) 
varies depending on the incidence of the adverse effect in the exposed population – with a larger 
adjustment factor necessary to extrapolate from the POD to lower levels of incidence.  The IPCS 
report provides AFintraspecies for several incidence (I) values.  The P50 and P95/P50 values for 
AFintraspecies provided by IPCS for several values of I, along with additional values of I of interest 
for this analysis, are provided in the following table: 
 
Lognormal approximation of uncertainty distributions for intraspecies 
variability (AFIntraspecies) for varying levels of population incidence (I) 
Incidence (I) 
AFIntraspecies 
P50 
P95/P50 
10%a 
3.49 
2.24 
5%a 
4.98 
2.82 
1%a 
9.69 
4.32 
0.5% (1-in-200)a  
12.36 
5.06 
0.3% (1-in-333)b 
14.61 
5.64 
0.1% (1-in-1,000)a 
20.42 
6.99 
0.01% (1-in-10,000)a 
37.71 
10.39 
0.001% (1-in-100,000)b 
64.25 
14.65 
a IPCS Table 4.5 

b Calculated for this analysis using the same methods that were used to derive IPCS Table 
4.5 
 
Step 4:  Calculation of HDMI 
 
The output of the IPCS methodology is generically described as an HDMI value – the human dose 
(HD) associated with a particular magnitude of effect M at a particular population incidence I.  
For this analysis, the “M” represents either decreased brain weight in adult F1 males or 
decreased traction time.  The following tables present the calculation of HDMI for I = 1% and 
0.1% using the POD, AFInterspecies, and AFintraspecies values shown above. HDMI values for other 
levels of incidence can be determined by substituting the AFintraspecies values appropriate for each 
level of incidence into the tables below and then recalculating HDMI using the substituted 
AFintraspecies. 
 
The IPCS approach is a probabilistic method, so the HDMI is a distribution; selected values from 
that distribution are presented in the tables as follows: 
 
• P05:  5th percentile estimate (lower confidence limit) of HDMI (this value is shown in 
bold)  
• P50:  50th percentile estimate (median) of HDMI 
• P95:  95th percentile estimate (upper confidence limit) of HDMI. 
 
All HDMI values in the following tables are human equivalent concentration (HEC) 8-hour time-
weighted averages, as they incorporate the same dosimetric and duration adjustments applied by 
EPA (see steps 1 and 2 above). 
 
 

Calculation of HDMI from chronic 1-BP inhalation exposure:   
Decreased brain weight in adult F1 males 
(Incidence = 1%) 
Aspect 
P50 
P95/P50 
LOAEL 
110 ppm 
1 
AFLOAEL-to-NOAEL 
10 
3 
AFNOAEL-to-ED50 
0.22 
5 
IPCS POD = ED50 
49.5 ppm 
7.02 
AFInterspecies-BS 
1 
2 
AFInterspecies-TK/TD 
1 
10 
AFIntraspecies (I=1%) 
9.69 
4.32 
HDMI 
5.1 ppma 
30.7b 
P05 
P95 
HDMI (c) 
0.17 ppm 
157 ppm 
a HDMI (P50) = IPCS POD / (AFInterspecies-BS x AFInterspecies-TK/TD x AFIntraspecies) 
b(Composite P95/P50) = 10^[(log 7.02)2 + (log 2)2 + (log 10)2 + (log 4.32)2]0.5 = 30.7 
c HDMI (P05) = HDMI (P50) / (Composite P95/P50) 
  HDMI (P95) = HDMI (P50) x (Composite P95/P50) 
 
 
 

Calculation of HDMI from chronic 1-BP inhalation exposure:   
Decreased brain weight in adult F1 males 
(Incidence = 0.1%) 
Aspect 
P50 
P95/P50 
LOAEL 
110 ppm 
1 
AFLOAEL-to-NOAEL 
10 
3 
AFNOAEL-to-ED50 
0.22 
5 
IPCS POD = ED50 
49.5 ppm 
7.02 
AFInterspecies-BS 
1 
2 
AFInterspecies-TK/TD 
1 
10 
AFIntraspecies (I=0.1%) 
20.42 
6.99 
HDMI 
 2.4 ppma 
38.7b 
P05 
P95 
HDMI (c) 
 0.06 ppm 
94 ppm 
a HDMI (P50) = IPCS POD / (AFInterspecies-BS x AFInterspecies-TK/TD x AFIntraspecies) 
b(Composite P95/P50) = 10^[(log 7.02)2 + (log 2)2 + (log 10)2 + (log 6.99)2]0.5 = 38.7 
c HDMI (P05) = HDMI (P50) / (Composite P95/P50) 
  HDMI (P95) = HDMI (P50) x (Composite P95/P50) 
 
 
 

Calculation of HDMI from chronic 1-BP inhalation exposure:   
Decreased traction time 
(Incidence = 1%) 
Aspect 
P50 
P95/P50 
IPCS POD = BMC 
51 ppm 
2.06 
AFInterspecies-BS 
1 
2 
AFInterspecies-TK/TD 
1 
10 
AFIntraspecies (I=1%) 
9.69 
4.32 
HDMI 
5.3 ppma 
18.3b 
 
P05 
P95 
HDMI (c) 
0.29 ppm 
96 ppm 
a HDMI (P50) = IPCS POD / (AFInterspecies-BS x AFInterspecies-TK/TD x AFIntraspecies) 
b(Composite P95/P50) = 10^[(log 2.06)2 + (log 2)2 + (log 10)2 + (log 4.32)2]0.5 = 18.3 
c HDMI (P05) = HDMI (P50) / (Composite P95/P50) 
  HDMI (P95) = HDMI (P50) x (Composite P95/P50) 
 
 
 

Calculation of HDMI from chronic 1-BP inhalation exposure:   
Decreased traction time 
(Incidence = 0.1%) 
Aspect 
P50 
P95/P50 
IPCS POD = BMC 
51 ppm 
2.06 
AFInterspecies-BS 
1 
2 
AFInterspecies-TK/TD 
1 
10 
AFIntraspecies (I=0.1%) 
20.42 
6.99 
HDMI 
2.5 ppma 
23.9b 
 
P05 
P95 
HDMI (c) 
0.10 ppm 
60 ppm 
a HDMI (P50) = IPCS POD / (AFInterspecies-BS x AFInterspecies-TK/TD x AFIntraspecies) 
b(Composite P95/P50) = 10^[(log 2.06)2 + (log 2)2 + (log 10)2 + (log 6.99)2]0.5 = 23.9 
c HDMI (P05) = HDMI (P50) / (Composite P95/P50) 
  HDMI (P95) = HDMI (P50) x (Composite P95/P50) 
 
Interpretation of Results 
 
The National Academies and the WHO/IPCS have both recommended using the lower 
confidence limit (LCL) on a probabilistic dose-response distribution for use in decision-making, 
in place of a traditional reference dose (RfD) or reference concentration (RfC). The National 
Academies said in Science and Decisions that:  
 
Multiple risk-specific doses could be provided…in the various risk characterizations that 
EPA produces to aid environmental decision-making.41  
 
A Risk-Specific Reference Dose: For quantal effects, the RfD can be defined to be the 
dose that corresponds to a particular risk specified to be de minimis (for example, 1 in 
100,000) at a defined confidence level (for example, 95%) for the toxicity end point of 
concern.42 
 
The WHO/IPCS said:  
 
The LCL of the HDMI can be used as a probabilistic RfD to replace the deterministic RfD. 
In this case, the probabilistic RfD is the dose that protects the population from a specified 
magnitude and incidence of effect with a pre-specified per cent coverage (confidence).43 
 
41 National Research Council (2009). Science and Decisions: Advancing Risk Assessment, p. 140. 
42 National Research Council (2009). Science and Decisions: Advancing Risk Assessment, p. 140. 
43 World Health Organization, International Programme on Chemical Safety (2017). Guidance document on 
evaluating and expressing uncertainty in hazard characterization, 2nd edition, p. 12. 

Consistent with the guidance from the National Academies and the IPCS, we summarize the 
results of this analysis in the following table of the lower confidence limit (5th percentile or P05) 
risk-specific doses (HDMI) for multiple levels of risk (incidence or I), for both decreased brain 
weight in adult F1 males and decreased traction time. 
 
Risk-specific dose estimates for chronic inhalation exposures to 1-BP  
for two selected non-cancer endpoints 
 
 
Incidence (I) 
HDMI lower -confidence limit (P05)  
Decreased brain weight in 
adult F1 males 
Decreased traction time 
 
5% 
0.38 ppm 
0.68 ppm 
1% 
0.17 ppm 
0.29 ppm 
0.5% 
0.12 ppm 
0.21 ppm 
0.3% (1-in-333)b 
0.10 ppm 
0.17 ppm 
0.1% (1-in-1,000)a 
0.06 ppm 
0.10 ppm 
0.01% (1-in-10,000) 
0.03 ppm 
0.04 ppm 
0.001% (1-in-100,000) 
0.01 ppm 
 0.02 ppm 
 
 
Based on application of the WHO/IPCS methodology to decreased brain weight in adult F1 
males and decreased traction time from chronic exposure to 1-BP, we find that: 
 
• 0.38 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which 
decreased brain weight is expected in 5% of the exposed population, and 0.68 ppm is 
the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which decreased 
traction time is expected in 5% of the exposed population. 
• 0.17 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which 
decreased brain weight is expected in 1% of the exposed population, and 0.29 ppm is 
the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which decreased 
traction time is expected in 1% of the exposed population. 
• 0.06 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which 
decreased brain weight is expected in 0.1% of the exposed population, and 0.10 ppm 
is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which decreased 
traction time is expected in 0.1% of the exposed population. 
• 0.03 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which 
decreased brain weight is expected in 0.01% (1-in-10,000) of the exposed population, 
and 0.04 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at 
which decreased traction time is expected in 0.01% (1-in-10,000) of the exposed 
population. 

• 0.01 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation exposure at which 
decreased brain weight is expected in 0.001% (1-in-100,000) of the exposed 
population, and 0.02 ppm is the lower bound (95% confidence) chronic inhalation 
exposure at which decreased traction time is expected in 0.001% (1-in-100,000) of 
the exposed population. 
 
The implications of these risk values can be understood by comparison with the exposure levels 
considered by EPA to represent negligible risk in the Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane and 
comparison with EPA’s proposed workplace exposure limit.  The lowest non-cancer POD in 
EPA’s risk evaluation is 17 ppm and has a benchmark MOE of 100,44 meaning that EPA 
concludes for non-cancer outcomes that there are “negligible concerns for adverse human health 
effects”45 for any 1-BP exposure below 0.17 ppm (17 ppm / 100 = 0.17 ppm).  Our analysis 
indicates that an exposure of 0.17 ppm is equal to the lower-bound dose for the 1% (1-in-100) 
risk level for decreased brain weight, and is equal to the lower-bound dose for the 0.3% (1-in-
333) risk level for decreased traction time.  These risks far exceed EPA’s usual target range of 
protection for carcinogenic risks of 1-in-10,000 to 1-in-1,000,000.46 
 
EPA has proposed an existing chemical exposure limit (ECEL) of 0.05 ppm, which it says 
“represents the concentration at which an adult human, including a member of a PESS, would be 
unlikely to suffer adverse effects if exposed for a working lifetime” and “will eliminate any 
unreasonable risk of injury to health from occupational inhalation exposures.”47  Our analysis 
indicates that an exposure of 0.05 ppm is just below the lower-bound dose for the 0.1% (1-in-
1,000) risk level for decreased brain weight, and is greater than the lower-bound dose for the 
0.01% (1-in-10,000) risk level for decreased traction time.  These risks also exceed EPA’s usual 
target range of protection for carcinogenic risks of 1-in-10,000 to 1-in-1,000,000.48 
 
The estimates of HDMI presented here were based entirely on input values and equations 
available from the WHO/IPCS methodology document and related publications, and from EPA’s 
Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane. An important caveat to these calculations is that the values 
used to represent human variability may be understated.  The IPCS default human variability 
distribution is based on 37 data sets for human toxicokinetic variability and 34 data sets for 
human toxicodynamic variability.   Most of these data sets were obtained from controlled human 
exposure studies of pharmaceuticals conducted in small samples of healthy adults, representing 
 
44 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), Table 3-2. 
45 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), p. 243. 
46 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), p. 320. 
47 1-Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA).  Proposed Rule.  89 FR 
65066, August 8, 2024. 
48 U.S. EPA (2020). Risk Evaluation for 1-Bromopropane (n-Propyl Bromide), p. 320. 

considerably less variability than found in the general population.49,50,51 If human variability is 
underestimated, then the actual dose associated with each incidence level (e.g. I =1%, I = 0.1%) 
will be lower than the values obtained from this analysis – or in other words, risk at each dose 
will be underestimated.   
 
 
 
 
49 World Health Organization, International Programme on Chemical Safety (2017). Guidance document on 
evaluating and expressing uncertainty in hazard characterization, 2nd edition. 
50 Hattis, D., Lynch, M.K. (2007). Empirically observed distributions of pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
variability in humans—Implications for the derivation of single-point component uncertainty factors providing 
equivalent protection as existing reference doses. In Lipscomb, J.C. & Ohanian, E.V. (Eds.), Toxicokinetics in risk 
assessment (pp. 69-93). Taylor & Francis Group. https://doi.org/10.1201/b14275.  
51 Axelrad, D. A., Setzer, R. W., Bateson, T. F., DeVito, M., Dzubow, R. C., Fitzpatrick, J. W., Frame, A. M., Hogan, 
K. A., Houck, K., Stewart, M. (2019). Methods for evaluating variability in human health dose-response 
characterization. Hum Ecol Risk Assess, 25, 1-24. https://doi.org/10.1080/10807039.2019.1615828.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0156 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
TO:
Bethany Masten
Existing Chemicals Risk Management Division 
Office of Pollution Prevention and Toxics 
Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW 
Washington, DC 20460-0001
FROM:
Campus Safety Health and Environmental Management Association
SUBJECT:
CSHEMA’s Comments on EPA 1-Bromopropane (1–BP); Regulation Under the 
Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) (Docket No. EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0032) 
– Proposed Rule dated August 8, 2024
Dear Ms. Masten: 
The Campus Safety, Health, and Environmental Management Association (CSHEMA) is a professional 
organization composed of thousands of safety professionals from over 400-member public and private 
institutions of higher education, including many R1 institutions. Our professional organization includes 
highly educated, experienced, and credentialed experts in chemical safety, risk management, and 
industrial hygiene. Members are thought-leaders at their respective institutions focused on ensuring the 
safety and security of researchers, the public, and the environment.
CSHEMA professionals are supportive of regulatory measures that increase health and safety at 
universities and colleges, as well as for the general public and the environment. The Environmental 
Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) proposed rulemakings under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), 
including the current proposed rule for 1-bromopropane, present challenges in academic laboratory 
environments that use the materials subject to these rules in basic research and teaching applications. 
Application of TSCA to Academic Laboratories
Academic teaching and research laboratories are critical national assets. They provide training and 
education for the American scientific workforce and conduct fundamental research needed for a 
greener, safer future. These research laboratories use a wide variety of hazardous materials at small 
volumes relative to industrial processes. Laboratories are well equipped with administrative controls 
and personal protective equipment in addition to robust engineering controls, like chemical fume hoods, 
designed so that researchers are not exposed to the hazardous materials with which they work. 
In the past, EPA and the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) have understood that 
academic laboratories are fundamentally different than industrial work environments, even industrial 
research and development laboratories. They have provided streamlined compliance structures such as 
40 CFR 262 Subpart K and the Laboratory Standard (29 CFR 1910.1450) that align with the risk involved 
and have successfully protected the environment and the health of laboratory workers working with 

chemicals at laboratory scale, defined by OSHA as “work with substances in which the containers used 
for reactions, transfers, and other handling of substances are designed to be easily and safely 
manipulated by one person.” The structure of EPA’s proposed rule for 1-bromopropane is a significant 
departure for laboratories as the new EPA rule is not aligned with existing OSHA requirements. The Lab 
Standard affords flexibility to implement controls specified by the institution’s Chemical Hygiene Plan 
that are appropriate to the nature of the research and that are not prescriptive, unlike other OSHA 
standards that regulate specific chemicals that are applicable to industrial and other non-lab uses. While 
OSHA has not promulgated a chemical-specific standard for 1-bromopropane, laboratories are already 
required to implement heightened controls for its use as a “Particularly Hazardous Substance”.    
The two elements that distinguish academic laboratories from industrial work environments are the 
small volume of chemicals and the highly variable nature of work from one day to the next. Laboratories 
may store laboratory scale containers of chemicals, including 1-bromopropane, but only use them as 
needed for specific projects. Exposure monitoring that is required on a fixed timescale may not be 
reasonable as they may not have any work scheduled with the compound by the compliance due date. 
Having laboratories conduct a procedure solely for the purposes of sampling would be increasing risk 
unnecessarily. 
EPA should clarify that storage of 1-bromopropane itself does not trigger the exposure monitoring 
requirements of the proposed rule.
It is critical that the various TSCA regulatory requirements be aligned across all substances. Research 
laboratories use a wide variety of laboratory scale hazardous chemicals that the EPA is expected to 
regulate under TSCA, and which will continue to be regulated by OSHA. The recordkeeping requirements 
under each set of regulations do not align with each other. Significant differences between the various 
recordkeeping requirements just for substances regulated by EPA under TSCA will create confusion. 
Campus EHS programs will struggle to effectively evaluate compliance, particularly in laboratories using 
multiple regulated chemicals. Campus EHS programs will likely respond to this challenge by diverting 
resources from evaluations of work practices and controls towards increased auditing of laboratory 
paperwork. 
Specific 1-Bromopropane Rule Concerns  
Some of the measures proposed in this rule have significant impact on academic research and 
substantial investment at a time when consistent higher education funding is under threat. 
1.
Prohibition of increased exhaust of 1-bromopropane to ambient air. Academic laboratories use 
small quantities (often much less than 1 liter) within fume hoods that are generally tied to high 
velocity exhaust stacks. Monitoring and/or filtration of laboratory exhaust is rare and even 
baseline measurements would present a significant challenge to academic research support 
services. Laboratory HVAC systems are sensitive and major changes to add filtration or 
monitoring capabilities would significantly disrupt all research in the lab or building, not just 
specific research operations using 1-bromopropane, and may not even be possible in some 
systems. The predominant form of engineering control employed in laboratories is the chemical 

fume hood. Chemical fume hoods are used to capture a wide range of acidic, basic, and organic 
vapors and gases, as well as organic and inorganic particulates.  No technology exists which 
would be capable of efficiently and effectively removing such a broad range of contaminants, or 
of capturing 1-bromopropane in the presence of those other contaminants. Ductless fume 
hoods with integral filtration have limited application in research laboratories due to the 
limitations in filtration technology and are not recommended for use with highly hazardous 
chemicals where a filter failure or overload-breakthrough could result in a significant exposure. 
This proposal would significantly decrease the availability and feasibility of using fume hoods to 
control 1-bromopropane exposures, by significantly increasing the cost and complexity of 
constructing and operating fume hood systems when research requires even small volume, 
infrequent use of this material. Existing chemical fume hoods are typically not equipped with 
any equipment to capture contaminants. In some cases, it may be possible over time to install 
appropriate scrubbers.  Any equipment installed to remove contaminants from exhaust gases 
will take up physical space, increase the weight that must be supported by the building, and will 
require energy to run. Each of these will be compounded by the need to replace existing blower 
motors with larger models that consume more energy to compensate for the added flow 
restriction from the treatment equipment. Where these conditions can be satisfied, the installed 
equipment would also generate significant quantities of hazardous waste in the form of 
contaminated filters or scrubbing liquid. The cost impact of the installation of these units is 
difficult to estimate within the timeframe allotted for the comment period. Beyond the cost of 
the purchase and installation, estimates would need to include the above-mentioned upgrades, 
maintenance, and waste management costs which may vary significantly from a regional 
perspective. 
2.
Scrubbing Technology Mandate: The necessity of mandating installation of scrubbing 
technology remains unproven. EPA’s risk evaluation for 1-bromopropane found that it does not 
present an unreasonable risk of injury to health (general population). EPA did not evaluate risks 
to the general population from ambient air and disposal pathways for any conditions of use. This 
absence of data does not establish a basis for imposing such a costly requirement on operators 
of laboratories who use small volumes of 1-bromopropane, often infrequently.
3.
Qualified Evaluator Requirements: Defining that only an Environmental Professional or 
Certified Industrial Hygienist can review of non-detect exposure monitoring results and 
determine if additional sampling is not needed. This requirement would exclude experienced 
industrial hygiene and occupational safety staff who would be able to appropriately review this 
material. As laboratories use chemical fume hoods and small volumes, non-detect results are 
likely and restricting the review of these results and/or requiring additional sampling is 
financially burdensome non-commensurate with the risk of exposure. This is also a different 
requirement from the Methylene Chloride exposure monitoring requirements. 

4.
Compliance timeline to be 6-months. The Methylene Chloride final rule was increased to 1-year 
and institutions are scrambling to adhere to that deadline. As institutions grapple with 
implementing multiple TSCA rules with overlapping compliance timelines, extending the 
timeline would allow EHS offices time to appropriately advocate for allocation of staffing and 
resources to dedicate to compliance within a typical budget cycle.   
At a minimum we request the requirements should be the same between the major provisions of the 
various TSCA rules. Ideally, this will take the form of a superseding regulation similar in intent to Subpart 
K or the Laboratory Standard. This will continue to be more concerning as the EPA regulates more 
laboratory chemicals under TSCA. CSHEMA as an organization would be willing to facilitate a 
conversation with TSCA regulators with academic industrial hygiene and campus EHS professionals to 
define a collective, collaborative approach that would better help support safe and sustainable research 
and teaching across the country. 
If you have questions or would like to discuss the impacts on the college and university sector, CSHEMA 
is happy to identify representatives to participate in that discussion.  We appreciate the EPA’s 
consideration of CSHEMA’s comments.   
Sincerely,  
James Crandall
CSHEMA President 2024-2025 
www.cshema.org  
y,
James Crandal

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0157 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 ---
1 
 
Comments of the American Chemistry Council 
 
on the  
 
1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Regulation under the Toxic Substances Control Act 
89 Fed. Reg. 65066 (August 8, 2024); Docket EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471 
 
September 23, 2024 
 
*** 
 
Introduction 
 
The American Chemistry Council (ACC) is pleased to submit these comments in response to the 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s or the Agency’s) proposed risk management rule 
for 1-Bromopropane (1-BP)1 under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA). ACC represents 
the business of chemistry in the United States. Our industry is at the forefront of creating the 
groundbreaking products that are improving the world all around us by making it healthier, safer, 
more sustainable, and more productive. ACC’s membership manufactures, processes, and uses 
the 1-BP, a volatile organic compound (VOC) with a variety of industrial, commercial, and 
consumer uses. 
 
*** 
 
Executive Summary 
 
ACC appreciates EPA’s efforts in its ongoing implementation of the 2016 amendments to the 
Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) to evaluate, determine, and where present, reduce 
unreasonable risk from uses of chemicals so that the risk is acceptable. Where unreasonable risk 
is present for a specific condition of use, whether in workplaces or elsewhere, risk management 
measures should be carefully tailored to address the risk only to the extent necessary for that 
condition of use. 
 
For occupational exposures, where the agency has information to suggest that exposures that 
present unreasonable risk can be well-managed as part of a Workplace Chemical Protection 
Program (WCPP) or performance standards, those requirements are appropriate to manage the 
risk. Where these measures are available, all public (federal agency) and private (non-
government industry and commercial interest) stakeholders should have an equal opportunity to 
meet the standards set in any risk management rule. Any EPA requirements addressing 
workplaces should be well-informed by the discipline of industrial hygiene; aligned where 
possible with existing OSHA requirements; and favoring performance-based rather than 
prescriptive requirements, which reduce regulatory burden and allow for more flexible 
approaches to regulatory compliance. 
 
 
1 1-Bromopropane (1-BP); Regulation Under the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA), 89 Fed. Reg. 65066 
(August 8, 2024). 

 
2 
 
EPA’s final rule here will not be an isolated exercise; under an amended TSCA, EPA will be 
proceeding with more and more risk management rules. EPA’s proposals are seeking to enter the 
workplace, and each rule may impose another layer of regulation – in some cases, for the same 
workplace. It will be important for EPA to avoid regulatory redundancy and conflict in its 
regulations.  
 
We support EPA’s development of a consistent approach to setting de minimis levels in this and 
other risk management rules. OSHA GHS limits are generally appropriate as a default or starting 
approach, although in some cases, as here, a higher de minimis limit may be warranted by the 
specific characteristics of a chemical and exposure (use) patterns.  
 
Discussion 
 
1. EPA’s Application of a Single Risk Determination (formerly “Whole Chemical 
Determination”) to 1-BP is Not Consistent with TSCA Requirements. 
 
Section 6(b) of TSCA requires the agency to evaluate risks of chemical substances “under the 
conditions of use.” The term “conditions of use” (COUs) is defined by Section 3(4) as “the 
circumstances, as determined by the Administrator, under which a chemical substance is 
intended, known, or reasonably foreseen to be manufactured, processed, distributed in 
commerce, used, or disposed of.” A risk evaluation necessarily must consider not just the 
potential hazard of a substance but exposure. Exposure necessarily differs based on conditions of 
use. The statute clearly contemplates that each condition of use is evaluated in the risk 
assessment and also that any subsequent regulation is applied to each condition of use. The best 
reading of the statute is that risk determinations must also be applied to each condition of use.   
 
EPA, however, implemented a policy decision by press release on June 30, 2021 to make a 
single risk determination, not based on specific conditions of use, but for the “whole chemical”: 
 
Under the previous administration, EPA made separate unreasonable risk 
determinations for every condition of use of a chemical. For the first 10 chemicals 
under TSCA and for any similar chemical that presents significant risks across 
many uses, EPA will continue to assess and analyze each condition of use, but 
then the agency plans to make the determination of unreasonable risk just once for 
the whole chemical when it is clear the majority of the conditions of use warrant 
one determination. EPA intends to withdraw the previously issued orders for 
those conditions of use for which no unreasonable risk was found for all the first 
10 risk evaluations. The agency then intends to issue revised unreasonable risk 
determinations for these chemicals as a “whole substance” and seek public 
comment on this approach.2  
 
Under this policy, EPA interprets TSCA to allow it to make a single determination of 
unreasonable risk, which has the effect of dragging COUs that do not need to be further 
regulated into a risk management rulemaking. This approach is deeply flawed, flies in the face of 
 
2 EPA press release, “EPA Announces Path Forward for TSCA Chemical Risk Evaluations” (June 30, 2021), 
https://www.epa.gov/newsreleases/epa-announces-path-forward-tsca-chemical-risk-evaluations. 

 
3 
 
common sense, and is the essence of regulatory overreach. We urge EPA to issue “does not 
present” unreasonable risk determinations for each applicable COU, by order, at the completion 
of the risk evaluation. For administrative convenience, EPA could issue a single order including 
all the COUs receiving does-not-present-unreasonable-risk determinations. 
 
2. When the Agency Elects to Evaluate Worker Exposures, It Should Do So While 
Evaluating All Conditions of Use, Including Legal Requirements Applicable to 
Workers and Standard Operating Practices. 
 
EPA completed its risk evaluation of 1-BP in August 2020. After the risk evaluation was 
completed, EPA reopened the risk determination section of the evaluation and reissued it, 
applying another new policy announced by the agency that it would conduct risk evaluations 
assuming that workers were in fact not wearing personal protective equipment provided by their 
employers. The agency’s policy is to apply this “no PPE” assumption regardless of the specific 
facts in the administrative record related to the chemical under review. We urge EPA to 
reconsider this policy, and to ensure that it considers applicable legal requirements, such as 
OSHA requirements; patterns and practices of behavior; company requirements, including 
standard operating procedures and accepted industry best practices; industry guidance documents 
and manuals; training programs; certification programs; enforcement data; voluntary consensus 
standards; and conclusions of professional society (expert) bodies in industrial hygiene, such as 
by the American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA) and American Conference of 
Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). This review must extend not just to how “the 
chemical” is already regulated in the workplace, but how the workplace itself is regulated. A 
particular worker might be handling dozens of different chemicals and processes at a facility 
under other security and process safety conditions, in which case it could be unreasonable to 
assume a worker would not wear PPE.  
 
EPA’s groundless assumption that PPE is not being worn is not a sufficient evidentiary basis in a 
particular TSCA risk evaluation on which to base subsequent regulatory action. Nor can EPA 
point to general data about PPE use to ground this assumption; general data about PPE use is not 
relevant to the specific conditions of use of the chemical under risk evaluation that the statute 
requires to be evaluated. We encourage EPA to discontinue applying its “no PPE” policy 
approach to TSCA risk evaluations.  
 
3. EPA Should Propose and Justify Appropriately Tailored Risk Management 
Measures Rather than Proposing Prohibitions. 
 
EPA’s approach to risk management continues to default to proposed prohibitions. EPA 
proposes to ban multiple uses of 1-BP outright. EPA’s rationale for the bans is that it is uncertain 
whether the sectors associated with these uses can comply with the proposed Worker Chemical 
Protection Program (WCPP), including the newly proposed direct dermal contact control 
requirements (DDCC). But EPA must justify its proposed regulatory action with substantial 
evidence in the administrative record. Assuming – without citing supporting evidence – that 
those COUs cannot meet the WCPP provisions does not meet that standard.  
 

 
4 
 
Congress left intact in the 2016 TSCA Amendments the substantial evidence standard of review. 
TSCA provides that a reviewing court “shall hold unlawful and set aside” a final rule 
promulgated under § 6(a) “if the court finds that the rule is not supported by substantial evidence 
in the rulemaking record ... taken as a whole.” TSCA § 19(c)(1)(B)(i), 15 U.S.C. § 
2618(c)(1)(B)(i).  In a 1eading 1988 case,3 the D.C. Circuit reviewed the 1976 TSCA legislative 
history on this provision and concluded that the TSCA standard supports “more searching” 
scrutiny than under the APA’s “substantial evidence” and “arbitrary and capricious” standards: 
 
This case, therefore, does not turn on an interpretation of the term “substantial 
evidence” as it appears in the APA,  but on an interpretation of the term 
“substantial evidence in the rulemaking record ... taken as a whole” as it appears 
in TSCA.  Despite the similarity in wording, Congress apparently contemplated 
that the TSCA standard should be viewed as a distinct standard; otherwise there 
would have been no need to specifically rule out the APA review standard …. 
 
Both the House and the Conference Report thus indicate that it was Congress’ 
intent that review of test rules under section 4 of TSCA [and rules under other 
sections of TSCA] be more searching than the judicial review undertaken in most 
agency cases. 
 
EPA’s obligation, once making an unreasonable risk determination, is to remove the 
unreasonable risk, reducing the risk to reasonable or acceptable. EPA is to apply risk 
management measures only to the extent necessary to do this. “To the extent necessary” is 
commonly understood to mean that something should only be done to the level or degree that is 
necessary – and then stop. 
 
EPA has not demonstrated in its proposed rule that bans are necessary. EPA should explain why 
other risk management options cannot adequately address the unreasonable risk and why a 
prohibition is necessary.  
 
4. EPA Should Establish an Appropriate De Minimis Level for 1-BP. 
 
We support establishment of an appropriate, science-based de minimis level for 1-BP. This helps 
account for impurities that do not contribute to unreasonable risk, and provides significant 
regulatory burden reduction to the regulated community. We agree that EPA should seek to 
establish de minimis levels as a matter of course in TSCA risk management rules, and here in the 
1-BP rule. Generally speaking, there is significant value in at least aligning de minimis values 
with Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Globally Harmonized System 
(GHS) for Classification and Labeling of Chemicals values. In some cases, however, a higher 
value may be appropriate. 
 
A de minimis threshold for reporting purposes is a well-accepted basis for reporting on the 
presence of a chemical substance. OSHA’s Hazard Communication Standard and GHS both use 
a de minimis threshold of 1%/.1% for non-carcinogenic and carcinogenic substances, 
 
3 Chemical Manufacturers Ass’n v. US EPA, 859 F.2d 977, 991-92 (D.C. Cir. 1988) (citations and footnotes 
omitted).  Accord, Vinyl Institute v. EPA, No. 22-1089 (D.C. Cir., July 5, 2024), 2024 WL 3308356. 

 
5 
 
respectively. It is well understood that just because a chemical is present in a product at or above 
a threshold does not mean that it poses an unreasonable risk to health. The presence of a 
chemical at a de minimis level in a product or article can, for that product or article, indicate that 
the chemical in the product does not present unreasonable risk. 
 
In general, EPA should seek to align de minimis thresholds at least with the OSHA 
Communication Standard. This provides significant reduction in regulatory burden to industry 
and significantly improves the ability to comply. A de minimis level in a TSCA risk management 
rule can also serve as a proxy whereby the presence of the chemical at or below that level would 
not be expected to present unreasonable risk based on typical exposure scenarios.  
For any established de minimis level, we recommend that EPA consider applying this value to 
products, materials, formulations, and articles with consistency; to reporting and recordkeeping 
requirements; and to upstream manufacture, import, processing, distribution, recycling and 
circularity measures, disposal, and/or industrial/commercial/consumer uses. 
 
We encourage EPA to adopt a consistent approach to establishing de minimis levels in TSCA 
risk management rules, and to specifically clarify that impurities or the presence of the chemical 
at or below the de minimis level does not constitute unreasonable risk for the product, article, 
formulation, or material in which it is present. 
5. For Industrial and Commercial Conditions of Use, EPA Should Apply a Consistent 
Approach to Workplace Protection. 
EPA is seeking to prohibit many industrial and commercial conditions of use for 1-BP.  However, 
the industrial and commercial conditions of use that are not proposed for an exemption to a ban 
would be required to meet EPA’s newly proposed Existing Chemical Exposure Limit (ECEL) as 
part of a WCPP to avoid worker exposures above the ECEL. 
 
EPA has provided only a 45-day comment period for industries and businesses to learn of and 
assess the proposed ECEL, provide existing data or, if data does not currently exist, conduct 
monitoring, and provide sufficient information that EPA is satisfied that the ECEL and WCPP 
can be met. EPA seems to be taking the approach that it must have some unspecified, subjective, 
degree of certainty that a particular business or industry sector can meet the ECEL and the 
WCPP, but the demonstration that they “can” meet these requirements would be based on their 
current operations. In other words, companies would need to prove that they are already meeting 
a proposed ECEL – in which case, there is no justification for the unreasonable risk 
determination in the first place, and no justification for additional regulatory action. 
 
EPA also does not appear to have a reasoned basis with respect to its differential approaches to 
the private sector and public sector. Assuming regulation is required to reduce unreasonable risk 
to reasonable, the same uses by the public and private sector should receive the same risk 
management measures. This is also important for the federal agencies themselves, since their 
supply chains will necessarily involve private sector parties who are not contractors directly to 
the agency. While ACC does not view a 6(g) exemption for worker exposures as necessary if 
EPA imposes an ECEL and WCPP, EPA’s approach to 6(g) exemptions should be consistently 
applied to both public sector (government) and private sector entities. 

 
6 
 
6. For Workplace Occupational Safety Risk Management Measures, EPA Should Align 
its Approach to Chemical Risk Management with the Discipline of Industrial 
Hygiene. 
EPA’s approach to chemical risk management is inconsistent with the current practice of 
workplace occupational safety and industrial hygiene and therefore does not meet the TSCA 
scientific standard.4 Instead of focusing only on a single chemical hazard, it is the role of a 
workplace safety professional to identify all hazards that exist in the workplace, determine the 
level of acceptable risk, and implement controls to prevent or mitigate risk from workplace 
hazards to acceptable levels. EPA’s approach under TSCA and its subsequent requirements under 
an Exposure Control Plan (ECP) make the holistic work of evaluating hazards and implementing 
mitigations more difficult. Occupational health and safety, and industrial hygiene are fields in 
which professional judgment based on sound scientific data must be exercised. Each workplace 
is different, even those who are engaged in the same kind of business or owned by the same 
company. 
 
EPA’s risk management approach should align with current standard practice for occupational 
safety and industrial hygiene, as described further in these comments. This process often begins 
with evaluating the hazard against a risk matrix. A risk matrix evaluates the severity of the 
hazard against the likelihood of it occurring. A risk matrix helps the workplace safety 
professional assess all hazards in the workplace and properly prioritize time, capital, and labor 
hours to address the risk.  
 
In the case of chemical exposures, the occupational exposure limit (OEL) provides a quantitative 
example of the difference between reasonable and unreasonable risk. Regardless, preventing, or 
mitigating, exposures to below the OEL must still fit in with the broader workplace safety 
program. Hazards associated with prevention or mitigation must be considered in line with 
hazards associated with chemical exposure. EPA’s definition of feasible control must allow for 
this kind of flexibility. 
 
EPA should consult with industrial hygiene and occupational safety practitioners to better 
integrate standard practices and best practices for industrial hygiene workplace safety programs 
into its chemical risk management. 
7. The Proposed Existing Chemical Exposure Limit (ECEL) for 1-BP violates TSCA’s 
Scientific Standards Provision [15 U.S.C 2625(h)]. 
EPA’s proposed ECEL for 1-BP would be lower than current occupational exposure limits found 
throughout the world.  The GESTIS5 database of international limit values for chemical agents 
(i.e., occupational exposure limits)6 currently lists 8-hour occupational limit values for 1-BP 
from 7 national authoritative bodies around the world and the province of Ontario, Canada.  The 
current OELs for 1-BP fall between 0.1 ppm and 25 ppm.  In addition, the ACGIH Threshold 
Limit Value for 1-BP is 0.1 ppm.   
 
4 See 15 U.S.C. 2625(h). 
5 GESTIS is the Information system on hazardous substances of the German Social Accident Insurance. 
6 Available at: https://limitvalue.ifa.dguv.de/  

 
7 
 
A. EPA should establish a clear and transparent process for development of occupational 
exposure limits (aka Existing Chemical Exposure Limits) to the extent they are 
necessary for risk management under TSCA. 
One leading benchmark for development of occupational exposure limits is the recent 
recommendations in the National Academies of Science, Engineering and Medicine (NASEM) 
Review of the Department of Defense’s Revised Approach to Deriving an Occupational Exposure 
Level for Trichloroethylene (TCE).7  In that NASEM Review, DOD’s process for deriving an 
occupational exposure level for TCE is summarized.  The DOD approach is equally applicable to 
1-BP as it is a data rich chemical with similar uses to TCE.  Two critical features of the DOD 
approach are the weight of evidence review of available study data and the evidence integration 
to identify a toxic endpoint of concern.   
 
Similarly, Deveau et al. (2015) present a framework for the identification and systematic 
evaluation of OELs, which can be used to support risk characterization and risk management 
decisions in situations where multiple potentially relevant OELs exist.8 
 
While the process for developing this information in the context of a human health hazard 
characterization is similar to that for OEL derivation, it is not identical.  For example, the subject 
population for an OEL, the worker population, is different than the general population that is the 
subject of the human health hazard characterization especially if the toxic endpoint of concern is 
not related to reproductive toxicity.  The worker population is a differentially exposed population 
but it is not a susceptible population and worker populations are generally regarded to be 
healthier than the general population.  The derivation of an occupational exposure limits 
necessitates a problem formulation independent of the human health hazard characterization for 
the general population.   
B. EPA should use a weight of evidence approach to integrate data from various sources 
in deriving the ECEL for 1-BP. 
DOD has developed a holistic framework for evaluating epidemiological, controlled in vivo, 
mechanistic/in vitro, and computational evidence that can be used in deriving OELs.9 Likewise, 
Maurer et al. (2023) describe their approach for synthesis of the lines of evidence (LOE) from 
the available data and literature, which often include diverse and not readily comparable types of 
data similar to those found in the DOD approach.10  Also, the Occupational Alliance for Risk 
Science uses systematic review of the available data and literature, formal evidence integration 
 
7 National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. 2019. Review of DOD's Approach to Deriving an 
Occupational Exposure Level for Trichloroethylene. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press. 
https://doi.org/10.17226/25610.  
8 M. Deveau, C-P Chen, G. Johanson, D. Krewski, A. Maier, K. J. Niven, S. Ripple, P. A. Schulte, J. Silk, J. H. 
Urbanus, D. M. Zalk & R. W. Niemeier (2015) The Global Landscape of Occupational Exposure Limits—
Implementation of Harmonization Principles to Guide Limit Selection, Journal of Occupational and Environmental 
Hygiene, 12:sup1, S127-S144, DOI: 10.1080/15459624.2015.1060327.  
9 Lent EM, Sussan TE, Leach GJ, Johnson MS. Using Evidence Integration Techniques in the Development of 
Health-Based Occupational Exposure Levels. International Journal of Toxicology. 2021;40(2):178-195. 
doi:10.1177/1091581820970494.  
10 Maurer LL, Alexander MS, Bachman AN, Grimm FA, Lewis RJ, North CM, Wojcik NC and Goyak KO (2022) 
An interdisciplinary framework for derivation of occupational exposure limits. Front. Public Health 10:1038305. 
doi: 10.3389/fpubh.2022.1038305.  

 
8 
 
and an expert elicitation process to develop its Workplace Environmental Exposure Levels 
(WEELs®).11 
 
There are several examples of current OEL development processes being applied throughout the 
U.S. that use common elements of systematic review and weight of evidence review of available 
data and formal evidence integration.  While some of these elements were applied in the TSCA 
risk evaluations, EPA must formalize its approach and establish it for the specific purpose of 
ECEL development as a part of risk management under TSCA.  
C. EPA should adopt existing Federal standards or national consensus standards as 
occupational exposure limits under TSCA where such that the subject chemical does 
not present an unreasonable risk under associated conditions of use. 
In justifying its development of ECELs as occupational exposure limits for TSCA risk 
management rules, EPA regularly cites the statements associated with OSHA’s Permissible 
Exposure Limits (PELs) webpage: 
OSHA recognizes that many of its permissible exposure limits (PELs) are 
outdated and inadequate for ensuring protection of worker health.12 
EPA does not cite the remainder of OSHA’s narrative regarding its PELs: 
Section 6(a) of the OSH Act granted the Agency the authority to adopt existing 
Federal standards or national consensus standards as enforceable OSHA 
standards. Most of the PELs contained in the Z-Tables of 29 CFR 1910.1000 were 
adopted from the Walsh-Healy Public Contracts Act as existing Federal standards 
for general industry. These in turn had been adopted from the 1968 Threshold 
Limit Values (TLVs®) of the American Conference of Governmental Industrial 
Hygienists (ACGIH®). Some consensus standards from the American Standards 
Association were also adopted at that time, following the 6(a) procedures. 
Comparable PELs were adopted for shipyards (29 CFR 1915.1000) and 
construction (29 CFR 1926.55). 
As a matter of policy, EPA should adopt existing Federal standards or national consensus 
standards where meeting such a standard demonstrates that exposure to the subject chemical is 
controlled such that it does not present an unreasonable risk. Moreover, those regulated entities 
that can demonstrate they are meeting and can continue to meet such a standard should not be 
burdened with additional regulatory requirements that do not lead to additional public health 
benefits. This approach is also consistent with OMB Circular A-119, which among other things 
seeks to minimize reliance on government-unique standards when an existing standard would 
meet the Federal Government’s objective. 
D. No independent verification or peer review of the ECEL or the process to develop the 
ECEL was conducted. 
EPA’s quiet approach to ECEL development, lack of verification with outside experts, and 
general lack of public stakeholder engagement are disappointing. According to the rulemaking 
 
11 Available at: https://tera.org/OARS/poster.pdf). 
12 https://www.osha.gov/annotated-pels. 

 
9 
 
record, EPA developed its ECEL for 1-bromopropane in March of 2021.13 The memo describing 
the ECEL was posted to the TSCA Section 6(a) Rulemaking Docket for 1-bromopropane (EPA-
HQ-OPPT-2020-0471) on May 18, 2022, and the ECEL was publicly released for comment for 
the first time as part of the proposed risk management rule on August 8, 2024.  
 
Once again, the NASEM Review of DOD's Revised Approach to Deriving an OEL for TCE 
represents a benchmark for peer review that probably exceeds what is needed for the EPA ECEL 
for 1-BP. However, the NASEM Review also provides a stark contrast to the EPA approach and 
highlights critical deficiencies in that approach. 
 
EPA should conduct an independent peer review of its approach to derivation of OELs (aka 
ECELs). The individual ECELs should also be subject to peer review; however, that could occur 
with the peer review of the draft risk evaluation if the ECEL is ready at that time. As noted 
above, the ECEL derivation would be similar but not necessarily identical to the human health 
hazard characterization. 
8. EPA Must Dramatically Improve Transparency Regarding Its Process for 
Establishing Proposed ECELs. 
The Biden Administration has made a commitment to open government and regulatory 
transparency. Unfortunately, EPA has released the proposed ECELs by generating internal 
memorandums of limited detail to justify its conclusions and quietly placing them in the 
associated docket(s) a year or more later without notice or request for public comment. In the 
year since ECELs were posted to several dockets for the first ten chemicals for risk evaluation, 
EPA has not sought public dialogue with stakeholders, experts, or the regulated community. 
 
EPA did address the Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act (SBREFA) by holding 
a (closed) Small Business Advocacy Review Panel (SBAR Panel) between January and October 
2021.14 However, participation was limited, and the SBAR report was not made available until 
the proposed rule was released more than 18 months later. 
 
The Fifth U.S. Open Government National Action Plan states:15 
Transparency is a cornerstone of open government and can be an important driver 
of more-equitable outcomes, innovation, and accountability. By making available 
information about the condition of society, the economy, and the environment, as 
well as government decisions, activities, data collections, and program outcomes, 
the public can hold the Federal Government accountable. 
Public release of Federal Government research, information, and data can also enable greater 
evidence building, civic engagement, and public and private sector decision- making; accelerate 
private-sector breakthroughs for scientific innovations; and identify novel business opportunities. 
 
13 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention. Existing Chemical 
Exposure Limit (ECEL) for Occupational Use of 1-Bromopropane (1-BP). March 8, 2021. Available at: 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OPPT-2020-0471-0031.   
14 https://www.epa.gov/reg-flex/sbar-panel-methylene-chloride-risk-management-rulemaking-under-toxic-
substances-control.    
15 https://open.usa.gov/national-action-plan/5/. 
 

 
10 
 
More meaningful engagement of the public in the work of government results in better policy 
design and program administration — as policies more closely reflect and respond to the needs of 
individual communities — and also builds virtuous cycles of public trust and confidence in the 
Federal Government and in democratic institutions. 
 
EPA has a detailed, transparent, and credible process for Developing Acute Exposure Guideline 
Levels (AEGLs). In addition, a recent final rule from OSHA amending its existing standards for 
occupational exposure to beryllium and beryllium compounds evolved from a Notice of 
Proposed Rulemaking in August 2015 to issuance of the final rule in January 2017 and included 
a two-day public hearing in between. Similarly, there is a very detailed and robust process for 
development of occupational exposure limits that involves the engagement of a variety of experts 
and stakeholders with a resulting level of confidence in the ultimate outcome.16 
 
There are numerous other examples and approaches EPA could and should use to inform the 
public and regulated industry of its proposed ECELs, and to solicit public feedback regarding the 
technical aspects of their derivation, and the benefits and cost associated with their 
implementation. 
9. Conditions of Use and Entities That Can Meet the WCPP and ECEL Should Not Be 
Further Regulated. 
EPA requested comments regarding replacing the proposed prohibitions with compliance with 
the WCPP in instances where regulated entities are able to consistently demonstrate compliance 
with an ECEL through effective controls. EPA has stated that exposures at or below each ECEL 
would not result in unreasonable risk for chronic cancer and non-cancer and acute non-cancer 
inhalation endpoints. As such, any entity that can meet the WCPP and ECEL should not be 
subject to prohibition. 
 
For industrial processing of a chemical intermediate where the chemical is largely confined to a 
process reactor, and which requires infrequent tasks (such as loading, unloading, and 
maintenance of the equipment), management of such infrequent tasks (and exposures) should 
occur independently of an 8-hour health based occupational exposure limit that may have been 
developed based entirely different exposure conditions. These should be managed independently 
of a chronic OEL (or using an OEL based on the same exposure duration assumptions as relevant 
to the exposure scenario such as an acute daily limit), as appropriate, while maintaining suitable 
worker protections. A full suite of occupational safety systems and practices should be applied 
with exposure controls that may deviate from a specified health based OEL if the basis for its 
establishment is highly disparate from the conditions where it is being applied. 
10. EPA Should Provide Additional Clarity and Guidance Regarding Compliance with 
an ECEL as Part of a WCPP. 
With respect to the ECEL, the rule proposes that “the owner or operator must ensure that no 
person is exposed to an airborne concentration of 1-bromopropane in excess of 0.05 parts of 
1-bromopropane per million parts of air (0.05 ppm) as an eight (8)-hour TWA…”, and “ECEL 
action level means a concentration of airborne 1- bromopropane of 0.03 parts per million (ppm) 

 
11 
 
calculated as an eight (8)-hour time-weighted average (TWA).”16 
A. Compliance with the ECEL should be based on at least six personal breathing zone 
monitoring samples. 
For the purposes of compliance, EPA should clarify when exceedance of the ECEL represents 
non-compliance. ACC recommends that compliance (or lack thereof) be based on at least six 
personal breathing zone monitoring samples based on guidance from AIHA.17 The AIHA 
guidance notes that there is a point of diminishing return in collecting more than six to ten 
monitoring measurements based on statistical sampling theory. Given the repetitive nature of 
tasks associated with exposure scenarios at many manufacturing, processing, and industrial use 
facilities, a “rolling average” could be calculated based on the prior six measurements. In 
addition, ACC recommends that the Assigned Protection Factors (APF) for PPE be used where 
appropriate when determining compliance against the ECEL. 
B. EPA should describe how the ECEL may be adjusted for shifts greater than 8 hours. 
EPA’s New Chemicals Exposure Limits Section 5(e) Order Boilerplate Insert Under the Toxic 
Substances Control Act (TSCA) New Chemicals Program18 uses the Brief and Scala approach19 
and stipulates “for non-8-hour work-shifts, the NCEL for that work-shift (NCELn) must be 
determined by the following equation: NCELn = NCEL x (8/n) x [(24-n)/16], where n = the 
number of hours in the actual work-shift.” Additionally, there are toxicokinetic models for 
adjusting the OEL such as the maximum adjustment half-life (MAHL) model.20,21  AIHA offers a 
free spreadsheet-based tool for Toxicokinetic Extended Shift OEL Adjustment.22 Another option 
would be to adjust the IH monitoring result for shifts greater than 8 hours (e.g., 12 hour shifts) to 
an 8-hour TWA.  ACC recommends that EPA use an approach similar to those described above 
for application of an ECEL to shifts of greater than 8 hours. 
C. EPA should acknowledge the current industrial hygiene practice for establishing 
similar exposure groups (SEGs) in determining representativeness of compliance with 
the ECEL. 
To comply with the ECEL,  
each owner or operator would be required to determine each potentially exposed 
person’s exposure by either taking a personal breathing zone air sample of each 
potentially exposed person or taking personal breathing zone air samples that are 
 
16 88 Fed. Reg. 65115. 
17 Jahn SD, Bullock WH, Ignacio JS, et al. (2015) A Strategy for Assessing and Managing Occupational Exposures. 
4th Edition. Washington, DC: AIHA. 
18 Available at: https://www.epa.gov/reviewing-new-chemicals-under-toxic-substances-control-act-tsca/new- 
chemicals-exposure-limits  
19 Brief, R.S., and R.A. Scala: Occupational exposure limits for novel work schedules. Am. Ind. Hyg. Assoc. J. 
36:467–469 (1975). 
20 Verma, D.K. 2000. Adjustment of Occupational Exposure Limits for Unusual Work Schedules, Journal of the 
American Industrial Hygiene Association, 61:3, 367-374, DOI: 10.1080/15298660008984545. 
21 Armstrong, T., D.J. Caldwell, D.K. Verma. 2005. Occupational Exposure Limits: An Approach and Calculation 
Aid for Extended Work Schedule Adjustments. J. Occupational and Environmental Hygiene, 2: 600–607. 
22 Available at: https://www.aiha.org/public-resources/consumer-resources/apps-and-tools-resource-center/aiha-risk- 
assessment-tools/toxico-kinetic-extended-shift-oel-adjustment.  

 
12 
 
representative of each potentially exposed person’s exposure performing the same or 
substantially similar operations in each work shift, in each job classification, and in 
each work area (hereinafter identified as an “exposure group”).23 
According to the proposed rule,  
Exposure group means a group consisting of every person performing the same or 
substantially similar operations in each work shift, in each job classification, in 
each work area where exposure to chemical substances or mixtures is reasonably 
likely to occur.24 
Standard industrial hygiene practice includes the use of a Similar Exposure Group (SEG) in 
exposure monitoring campaigns. A SEG is a group of workers having the same general exposure 
profile for an agent because of the similarity and frequency of the tasks they perform, of the 
similarity of the materials and processes with which they work, and similarity of the way that they 
perform the tasks.25 EPA should confirm that its definition of an exposure in the proposed rule group 
aligns with the current standard approach for establishing SEGs. 
In addition, EPA should clarify when data from one facility may be representative of other 
facilities where similar tasks are performed whether the other facilities are or are not under the 
control of the owner/operator of the facility where the data were collected. 
11. EPA Should Further Clarify and Refine Monitoring Requirements for Compliance 
with the ECEL. 
EPA requested comment regarding the feasibility of entities complying with and monitoring for a 
potential ECEL of 0.05 ppm.  EPA aims to obtain more information on potential costs that could 
be incurred using strategies to meet the requirements of such a standard, such as engineering, 
administrative, or prescriptive controls and how feasible it would be for entities to implement 
these strategies in their operations. (VIII.45).26  
A. Sufficient capacity needs to be available for compliance with the ECEL. 
It may not be feasible to comply with requirements to conduct initial monitoring within 6 months 
after the rule is final due to a lack of laboratory capacity. A large number of entities will be 
required to comply with a new exposure limit that necessitates a new, lower detection limit. This 
will stress the industrial hygiene consultants who collect such samples and the laboratories that 
analyze the samples. EPA should confirm that there is sufficient capacity for companies to 
comply with the proposed requirements. If there currently is not sufficient capacity among firms 
that would support those regulated entities who need to satisfy the requirements of the proposed 
rule, EPA must ensure there is adequate time for such capacity to be established as part of the 
timeline for compliance with the rule. 
B. The Periodic Monitoring Requirements proposed are appropriate except for the 
 
23 88 Fed. Reg. 39673. 
24 Ibid. at 39716. 
25 Jahn SD, Bullock WH, Ignacio JS, et al. (2015) A Strategy for Assessing and Managing Occupational Exposures. 
4th Edition. Washington, DC: AIHA, p. 37. 
26 89 Fed. Reg. 65110. 

 
13 
 
recurrent 5-year initial monitoring. 
EPA requested comment on the timeframes for periodic monitoring outlined in Table 1 of the 
proposed regulation.27  EPA proposes periodic exposure monitoring is required at least once every 
five years when all initial exposure monitoring is below the ECEL action level (0.03 ppm).28  This 
requirement for initial monitoring every five years is unnecessary and overly burdensome for 
firms that have demonstrated compliance and whose processes have not changed in five years or 
more. It deviates from the monitoring frequencies in the OSHA Substance Specific Regulated 
Chemicals Standards. A lack of alignment between regulatory programs can create confusion for 
regulated entities resulting in possible compliance gaps. Additional monitoring should be based 
on local risk assessment reviews and management of change practices that seek to understand 
where changes have occurred so monitoring can be conducted to quantify changes in exposure 
risk.  The other Periodic Monitoring Requirements proposed are appropriate as the three 
month/six month strategy aligns with other OSHA practices with which regulated entities will be 
familiar.   
C. EPA should clarify monitoring requirements for infrequent tasks. 
The proposed rule is silent regarding monitoring and compliance for infrequent tasks, (i.e., where 
workers are potentially exposed to 1-bromopropane for fewer than 30 days per year).  The 
proposed rule appears to be focused primarily on potential exposures that occur on a daily basis 
and for a significant portion of the working day.  EPA should clarify requirements for monitoring 
and compliance for potential exposures whose frequency and duration vary from an “all day, 
every day” scenario. 
12. ACC Agrees with EPA That the Analysis of Exposure Samples Can Be Assured 
through Several Credible Programs. 
ACC agrees with EPA’s proposal regarding the analysis of exposure samples: 
 
Exposure samples must be analyzed using an appropriate analytical method by a 
laboratory that complies with the Good Laboratory Practice Standards in 40 CFR 
part 792 or a laboratory accredited by the American Industrial Hygiene 
Association (AIHA) or another industry-recognized program.29 
13. EPA Should Use a 15-day Notification Timeframe for Results of Workplace 
Monitoring. 
ACC agrees with the proposed requirement that the owner or operator must inform persons whose 
exposures are represented by the monitoring results within 15 working days.30 
 
27 Ibid. at 65108, VIII.12. 
28 Ibid. at 65117, Table 1. 
29 Proposed 40 CFR 751.807(b)(2)(C). 
30 89 Fed. Reg. 65117. 

 
14 
 
14. Attestations That Engineering Controls Do Not Increase Emissions of 1-BP to 
Ambient Air Outside, and Air Monitoring, Are Unnecessary. 
EPA requested comment on whether owners and operators should be required to attest to 
whether and why the exposure controls they have selected would not result in increased releases 
of 1–BP to ambient air from the workplace (VIII.42)31 and how these proposed requirements 
may impact the availability, feasibility, or cost of engineering controls as a means to reduce 
workplace exposures to or below the proposed ECEL (VIII.16).32  
 
EPA proposes:  
 
Attestation that exposure controls selected do not increase emissions of 1-
bromopropane to ambient air outside of the workplace and whether additional 
equipment was installed to capture or otherwise prevent increased emissions of 1-
bromopropane to ambient air.33 
 
This attestation would be a component of the Exposure Control Plan.   
 
The proposed rule states: 
 
in the instances where efforts to reduce exposures in the workplace to levels 
below the ECEL could lead to adoption of engineering controls that that may 
result in more 1–BP being ventilated outside, EPA believes this potential 
additional exposure would be limited as a result of anticipated revisions to 
NESHAP requirements following the designation of 1–BP as a HAP under the 
CAA. 
 
EPA expects that this proposed action, in combination with the emissions 
standards resulting from anticipated revisions to NESHAP requirements following 
the designation of 1–BP as a HAP, would reduce risk sufficiently to the general 
population and fenceline communities. EPA does not intend at this time to revisit 
the air pathway for 1–BP as part of a supplemental risk evaluation.34 
 
ACC agrees with EPA’s rationale that any emissions of a HAP under the CAA would be 
controlled by virtue of associated NESHAPs. Consequently, the proposed attestation should be 
eliminated. 
15. EPA Should Foster Flexibility in Exposure Control Consistent with the Practice of 
Industrial Hygiene. 
EPA requested comment on providing an option of either complying with the ECEL or 
implementing various administrative and engineering controls, such as those uses employed in a 
closed-loop system (VIII. 33). ACC recommends that EPA allow flexibility in permissible 
 
31 Ibid. at 65110. 
32 Ibid. at 65109. 
33 Proposed 40 CFR 751.807(c)(2)(i)(F); 89 Fed. Reg. 65118. 
34 89 Fed. Reg. 65103. 

 
15 
 
exposure controls to eliminate unreasonable risks to chemicals.  Given the great variety of 
workplace scenarios, industrial hygiene practitioners need flexibility in order to characterize 
potential hazards at each specific site and develop effective exposure control programs. ACC 
encourages EPA to adopt an approach where regulated entities have the option to comply with an 
occupational exposure limit, or apply various administrative and engineering controls with 
known effectiveness in mitigating exposures are options of any regulation. 
16. EPA Should Apply Existing Occupational Safety Performance Standards In Its Risk 
Management Rules Rather Than Prescribing Every Specific Element. 
EPA requested comment for a number of specific required elements of a WCPP or Prescriptive 
Controls:  
• EPA is soliciting comment on requiring warning signs to demarcate regulated areas, such 
as the requirements found in OSHA’s General Industry Standard for Beryllium (VIII.17). 
• EPA is requesting comment on whether there should be a requirement to replace 
cartridges or canisters after a certain number of hours, such as the requirements found in 
OSHA’s General Industry Standard for 1,3-Butadiene, or a requirement for a minimum 
service life of non-powered air-purifying respirators such as the requirements found in 
OSHA’s General Industry Standard for Benzene (VIII.18). 
• EPA is soliciting comments on the requirements proposed for appropriate PPE selection. 
In addition, EPA understands that some workplaces rinse and reuse PPE after minimal 
use and is therefore soliciting comments on the impact on effectiveness of rinsing and 
reusing certain types of PPE, either gloves or protective clothing and gear. EPA also 
requests comment on the degree to which additional guidance related to use of PPE might 
be appropriate (VIII.22). 
• EPA is soliciting comment on prescribing specific engineering or administrative controls 
that would reduce inhalation exposures enough to address the unreasonable risk across all 
workplaces engaged in a condition of use (VIII.26). 
EPA notes that some of these requirements might be similar to prescriptive requirements in 
existing OSHA Standards for Toxic and Hazardous Substances (29 CFR 1910 Subpart Z).  
However, the more general OSHA standards for things like Occupational Health and 
Environmental Control (29 CFR 1910 Subpart G), Personal Protective Equipment (29 CFR 1910 
Subpart I) and General Environmental Controls (29 CFR 1910 Subpart J) are more appropriate 
references that should be used. In the case of respirator cartridge replacement, the cartridge 
technology may change over time which would lead to a rigid rule prescribing a replacement 
schedule that has become obsolete. The Subpart I provisions for Personal Protective Equipment, 
specifically 29 CFR 1910.134 – Respiratory Protection, specify the requirements for a 
Respiratory Protection Program that would adapt over time to new technology and situations.  
EPA should defer to, and incorporate as necessary, existing performance based programs for 
exposure reduction rather than enumerating specific elements in its regulations. 
 
17. EPA’s Economic Analysis is Flawed. 
 
As considered against standards found in OMB Circular A-4 and certain executive orders, EPA’s 

 
16 
 
economic analysis is deficient in the following ways: 
 
• The need for the regulation is mischaracterized.    
• Cost is underestimated.  
• The methodology for microrisk reductions in cancer incidence should be subject to 
external, independent peer review. 
• The analysis of regulatory alternatives is incomplete.  
• The alternatives analysis is notable for its omissions.   
• The sensitivity analysis is insufficient.  
 
The need for the regulation is mischaracterized.    
EO 12866 says a regulation is necessary if it is “required by statute, necessary to interpret a 
statute, or made necessary by a compelling public need, such as a failure of private markets . . .” 
In the case of 1-BP, the proposed rule is required by statute because the agency has made a 
determination of unreasonable risk under TSCA. However, in Chapter 2, the Agency describes 
the underlying problem as one of a market failure, describing the negative externality without 
linking this characterization to data or evidence about the harm imposed from environmentally 
relevant levels of exposure to people external to market participants. Instead, the Agency offers 
platitudes drawn from economic textbooks.  
 
We note that the possibility of a market failure is not the same as an actual market failure—as 
Circular A-4 makes clear. Absent from the economic analysis is any acknowledgement that the 
market for 1-BP is a competitive market, with many buyers and many sellers. An abundance of 
health and safety information on this well-characterized substance is publicly available. In 
addition, the substance is regulated at the local, state, and federal level to ensure it is managed 
responsibly.      
 
We recommend that the Agency acknowledge (1) that the market for 1-BP is robust, (2) that the 
proposed rule is required by statute, and (3) either remove the statement about a negative 
externality or present evidence suggesting that there exists a negative externality impacting non-
market participants. Simply raising the possibility of a market failure does not comport with 
Circular A-4:  
 
Ideally, to the extent feasible, you should quantify the extent of any relevant 
market failure . . . with the resulting estimates integrated into your regulatory 
analysis. 
 
We should also point out that EPA’s determination of unreasonable risk is insufficient to 
characterize the substance as presenting a negative externality. The Agency’s determination of 
unreasonable risk is based on conservative assumptions (e.g., linear low-dose extrapolation) and 
therefore does not reflect expected risk, which should be the focus of the benefits component of 
the economic analysis.  
 
Cost is underestimated. 
The economic analysis underestimates the cost of the proposed rule. There are three reasons. The 
first is that the economic analysis fails to qualify and quantify the loss in consumer and producer 

 
17 
 
surplus. As Circular A-4 states:  
 
The opportunity cost of an alternative includes the value of the benefits forgone as 
a result of choosing that alternative. For instance, the opportunity cost of banning 
a product . . . is the forgone net benefit (including lost consumer and producer 
surplus) of that product, taking into account the mitigating effects of potential 
substitutes . . . You should include these effects in your analysis and provide 
estimates of their monetary values . . 
 
The Agency must acknowledge the expected loss of producer and consumer surplus—a certainty 
for any regulation that restricts production/use of a commercial product—and estimate it or 
explain why it cannot be estimated. The loss in producer and consumer surplus will exceed the 
cost of compliance—which is focal point of the Agency’s economic analysis. 
 
The second reason is that the proposed ECEL is impractical to attain. As noted in the executive 
summary: 
 
The ECEL may not be possible to meet with engineering and administrative 
controls alone and wearing the supplied air respirators that would be necessary to 
comply may not be practical. For users facing this scenario, the WCPP 
requirements would have the same effect as a prohibition. If this is the case for 
just 7% of vapor degreasers, the Option 1 net benefits would be net negative 
under all scenarios . . . . 
 
According to the executive summary: 
 
The most notable unquantified and/or uncertain costs are those associated with 
vapor degreasing requirements . . . if WCPP compliance is not practical the cost 
of switching to alternative cleaning methods is much higher and has the potential 
for economically important downstream impacts on other industries that rely on 
the parts cleaned using vapor degreasing (including aerospace, medical devices, 
and other manufacturing industries).  
 
The third reason is that the cost of replacing a process employing 1-BP (as a reactant, 
incorporation into articles, or to make building insulation) with another process was not 
considered “due to the complexity of the analysis,” according to Table 5-2. The Agency notes 
that switching processes is “not required or expected under the proposed option or primary 
alternative”—but makes no mention of the second alternative.  We are wary of Agency 
expectations that drop-in substitutes are often available for a chemical used in a manufacturing 
process; our experience suggests process changes are to be expected.    
 
The methodology for microrisk reductions should be subject to peer review.  
According to the economic analysis, “excess cancer risk estimates used in this analysis are the 
same as used in EPA’s 2016 and 2017 proposed TCE rules.” No explanation is provided. The 
Agency should provide the explanation.  
 

 
18 
 
The economic analysis uses the concept of a “microrisk” to value avoided cancer incidence. The 
procedure was developed for application to EPA TSCA risk management rules and was 
developed by Abt Associates (Estimated Values of Avoiding Cancer Risks by Cancer Site and 
Population, 2023) and funded by EPA. It is not clear to us if the methodology was subject to 
external peer review. It should be because of its import and in keeping with guidance found in 
the OMB peer review bulletin.  We recommend that EPA subject this methodology to the most 
rigorous peer review recommended in the OMB bulletin (for “highly influential scientific 
assessments”). 
 
In our view, the timing of avoided cancer risk reduction benefits is uncertain and the Agency 
should have also monetized health benefits when they are expected to be observed (as 
recommended in the previous version of OMB Circular A-4), taking into account the latency 
period and/or the cessation lag.  
 
The analysis of regulatory alternatives is incomplete.  
Circular A-4 calls for the analysis of a manageable number of reasonable regulatory 
alternatives—at least three (one more and less stringent than the preferred alternative). It also 
offers:  
 
If a regulation includes a number of distinct provisions, you should analyze the 
benefits and costs of alternatives to key individual provisions separately, when 
feasible and appropriate. 
 
For this proposed rule, the economic analysis identifies three regulatory alternatives, the 
proposal, one that is more stringent, and one that is, presumably, less stringent (primary 
alternative).  
 
We are struck by the small difference in cost between the proposal and the primary alternative, 
suggesting a different construction for the primary alternative—one with a less-stringent ECEL 
for the WCPP. Such an alternative would more closely adhere to Circular A-4.      
 
The alternatives analysis should focus on substitution risk.  
In its economic analysis, the Agency solely focused on determining the availability of alternative 
products at a similar price. Such an exercise is hardly sufficient. For all TSCA risk management 
rules, the Agency should acknowledge when it chooses not to conduct an analysis of substitution 
risk and instead chooses to conduct a less rigorous examination (e.g., of the hazards of chemical 
alternatives, absent exposure considerations). Without an analysis of substitution risk, the agency 
cannot be sure its regulation does more good than harm. EPA’s economic analysis does not 
estimate the risk of substitutes, even when the available substitutes themselves may be subject to 
future rulemaking under TSCA as a result of a risk analysis the Agency is obligated to undertake.  
 
The Sensitivity Analysis is insufficient. 
The economic analysis includes a sensitivity analysis to reflect the full range of the exposed 
population. In our view, other factors, mentioned previously, should be included in the 
sensitivity analysis: (1) higher costs associated with open-top vapor degreasing and (2) lower 
monetized benefits associated with the reduction in cancer incidence based on the time of design.  

 
19 
 
18. EPA’s Alternatives Assessment is Flawed. 
 
A properly conducted alternatives assessment should include comparative hazard assessment and 
comparative exposure assessment, but also includes lifecycle analysis and other key factors, such 
as equivalent or better performance of a product, cost, supply chain availability, and other 
factors. EPA’s assessments continue to focus largely on hazard assessment and are not fully 
considering the range of alternatives assessment factors set out in the National Academies’ A 
Framework to Guide Selection of Chemical Alternatives. Further, both EPA’s economics 
analysis and alternatives assessment fail to fully evaluate the potential for supply chain shocks 
and unavailability of both 1-BP and assessed alternatives. Where alternatives are or are likely to 
be regulated under other TSCA risk management rules, the lack of availability/market shortages 
should also be factored into these analyses.   
*** 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment. Please direct any questions to Karyn Schmidt, Senior 
Director, Regulatory & Scientific Affairs, Karyn_Schmidt@americanchemistry.com. 
 
 
 
 
 
Karyn Schmidt 
Senior Director, Regulatory & Scientific Affairs 
American Chemistry Council 
Karyn_Schmidt@americanchemistry.com
