
--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0133 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
1 
 
UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 
 
 
) 
National Emission Standards for 
)  
Hazardous Air Pollutants: Primary 
) 
Copper Smelting Residual Risk and 
) 
Technology Review and Primary 
) 
Copper Smelting Area Source 
) 
Technology Review; Proposed Rule ) 
Docket No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
) 
87 Fed. Reg. 1616 
) 
(January 11, 2022) 
) 
  
) 
 
COMMENTS OF SIERRA CLUB AND EARTHJUSTICE 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
More than a decade after the statutory deadline, EPA has issued a proposed review and 
revision of its air toxics emission standards for primary copper smelters under Clean Air 
Act § 112(d)(6) and § 112(f)(2). 
There are currently three primary copper smelters operating in the United States. Of 
these, two are by far the worst polluters. Both are located in close proximity to the San 
Carlos Apache Reservation. The Asarco smelter, owned by Grupo Mexico, is located in 
Hayden, Arizona, less than 5 miles from the Reservation. Freeport’s Miami, Arizona 
smelter is located less than 8 miles from the Reservation. 
In its Proposed Residual Risk Assessment (RRA) for copper smelters, EPA states that 
these two smelters alone emit “approximately 21 tons per year” of hazardous air 
pollutants.1 The bulk of these emissions, according to EPA, are toxic metals.2 The 21 ton 
per year (tpy) total includes 13 tpy of lead and 2 tpy of arsenic, according to EPA.3 
At these levels, the Freeport and Asarco smelters are among the worst lead emitters in 
the United States. To put their emissions into perspective, secondary lead smelters – long 
recognized as one of the worst lead emission sources – emit less than one half of one ton 
per year.4 By EPA’s estimates, the Freeport and Asarco smelters collectively emit more 
lead than 24 secondary lead smelters. 
Reports to EPA’s Toxics Release Inventory by the smelters’ owners indicate their 
 
1 EPA, Residual Risk Assessment for the Primary Copper Smelting Source Category in 
Support of the 2021 Risk and Technology Review Proposed Rule (February 2021), EPA-
HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0051 (RRA) at 5. 
2  Id. 
3 Id. at 38 (Table 3.1-1), Appendix 1, Emissions Data Used for Primary Copper Smelting 
Risk and Technology Review (RTR) Modeling Files, at A-4 – A-5. 
4 77 Fed. Reg. 563, 575 (January 5, 2012). 

2 
 
emissions are even higher. In 2020, for example, the Freeport smelter alone reported 
emitting more than 14 tons of lead.5 In 2019, it reported emitting 21 tons of lead and, in 
2018, it reported emitting more than 29 tons of lead – more than twice the amount EPA 
estimates for all copper smelters put together.6 Moreover, there is strong reason to believe 
that these smelters’ future emissions will be higher than their present or past emissions. 
Smelters’ emissions are largely a function of their production levels, and copper production 
levels are certain to increase significantly. Copper is critical to our clean energy pathway, 
and its use in electric cars, new transmission lines, wind energy generation, and solar 
energy generation will grow as the U.S. builds toward a clean energy economy.  “An 
energy system powered by clean energy technologies differs profoundly from one fueled 
by traditional hydrocarbon resources. Solar photovoltaic (PV) plants, wind farms and 
electric vehicles (EVs) generally require more minerals to build than their fossil fuel-based 
counterparts. A typical electric car requires six times the mineral inputs of a conventional 
car and an onshore wind plant requires nine times more mineral resources than a gas-fired 
plant. Since 2010 the average amount of minerals needed for a new unit of power 
generation capacity has increased by 50% as the share of renewables in new investment has 
risen.”7 Copper smelters’ production will increase and, as it does, their toxic pollution will 
increase as well unless EPA acts now to require far better pollution controls      
EPA has known for decades that the metals emitted by copper smelters are highly 
toxic. The agency recognized in its original 2002 rule for copper smelters that arsenic and 
nickel are human carcinogens and that lead, cadmium, and beryllium are probable human 
carcinogens.8 “Exposure of humans to arsenic by inhalation or by ingestion has been 
shown to be associated with forms of lung, bladder, liver, and other cancers. Brain damage, 
kidney damage, and gastrointestinal distress may occur from acute exposure to high levels 
of lead in humans. Chronic exposure to lead by humans results in effects on the central 
nervous system, blood, blood pressure, and kidneys.”9 
Subsequent information shows that the health impacts are even worse than EPA knew 
in 2002. EPA has stated that “[o]nce taken into the body, lead distributes throughout the 
body in the blood and is accumulated in the bones. Depending on the level of exposure, 
lead can adversely affect the nervous system, kidney function, immune system, 
reproductive and developmental systems and the cardiovascular system. Lead exposure 
also affects the oxygen carrying capacity of the blood. The lead effects most likely to be 
encountered in current populations are neurological effects in children. Infants and young 
children are especially sensitive to lead exposures, which may contribute to behavioral 
problems, learning deficits and lowered IQ.”10   
 
5 TRI Spreadsheets showing Freeport’s and Asarco’s reported emissions of lead 
compounds, Ex. A hereto. 
6 Id. 
7 https://www.iea.org/reports/the-role-of-critical-minerals-in-clean-energy-
transitions/executive-summary 
8 67 Fed. Reg. 40,478, 40,481 (June 12, 2002). 
9 Id. 
10 Basic Information about Lead Air Pollution, EPA, available at 
https://www.epa.gov/lead-air-pollution/basic-information-about-lead-air-pollution  

3 
 
The World Health Organization has found that even “[a]t lower levels of exposure that 
cause no obvious symptoms, lead is now known to produce a spectrum of injury across 
multiple body systems.”11 “In particular, lead can affect children’s brain development, 
resulting in reduced intelligence quotient (IQ), behavioural changes such as reduced 
attention span and increased antisocial behaviour, and reduced educational attainment. 
Lead exposure also causes anaemia, hypertension, renal impairment, immunotoxicity and 
toxicity to the reproductive organs. The neurological and behavioural effects of lead are 
believed to be irreversible.”12 
Emissions of lead, arsenic, and other hazardous air pollutants from the Asarco and 
Freeport smelters put people in nearby communities – and especially children – at risk of 
serious health and developmental harm. The threat is particularly great on the San Carlos 
Apache Reservation because these smelters have been operating, and emitting toxic 
pollution, in the same locations – just a few miles from the Reservation – for more than a 
century. Many of the pollutants they emit, including lead, arsenic, and dioxins, are both 
persistent in the environment and bioaccumulative, and have built up on the Reservation 
for more than a century.  
 
The exposure of people in nearby communities to the smelters’ current emissions in the 
air is exacerbated by exposure to previous years and decades of pollution that contaminate 
water, soil, playgrounds, gardens, and food. Not only are the Tribe and surrounding 
communities affected by both the fugitive and stack emissions from these two smelters, but 
they are also affected by resuspension of the legacy lead which has already been deposited 
in the environment. Fully half of the tribal members are under the age of twenty, when 
exposures to these heavy metals can do the most long-term damage to their 
health.  Moreover, a significant percentage of the tribal households live below the poverty 
line; this is an environmental justice community who lands and future are being damaged 
by these toxic emissions. EPA must take strong actions to reduce this pollution if it it to 
avoid irreparably harming the Tribe’s lands, people, and future. 
Regrettably, EPA’s proposed RTR will do little to reduce these exposures. EPA 
states that its proposed rule would reduce copper smelters’ toxic emissions by 4.26 tpy, or 
approximately 20 percent.13 By EPA’s estimates it will allow copper smelters to continue 
emitting approximately 17 tons of hazardous air pollutants, including almost 11 tons of 
lead and almost 1.8 tons of arsenic each year. As before, these emissions will be emitted 
almost entirely from two smelters that are both located in close proximity to the San Carlos 
Apache Reservation. 
 
Based on the emission estimates that Asarco and Freeport, continuing toxic 
emissions will be even higher. The lead emissions Asarco reported to TRI from 2015-2017 
(before it shut down for most of 2018), averaged 6506 pounds per year.14 The average lead 
emissions from the Freeport-McMoran smelter from 2018-2020 were 43,033 pounds. Thus, 
 
11 Fact Sheet, Lead Poisoning, WHO (Oct. 11, 2021), https://www.who.int/news-
room/fact-sheets/detail/lead-poisoning-and-health .  
12 Id. 
13 87 Fed. Reg. 1616, 1650 (January 11, 2022). 
14 TRI Spreadsheets showing Freeport’s and Asarco’s reported emissions of lead 
compounds, Ex. A hereto. 

4 
 
although the incomplete data for the Asarco smelter make a direct year-by-year comparison 
impossible, the average combined lead emissions from these two smelters in recent years is 
approximately 25 tons per year. Reducing these emissions by 20 percent would allow them 
to continue to emitting 20 tons of lead each year. 
Needless to say, if copper smelters’ production increases in the next years as 
expected, their emissions of lead, arsenic and other toxics will be even higher. To allow the 
continued emissions of 11 tons, 20 tons, or even more lead into the San Carlos Apache 
Reservation is an environmental injustice. These emissions exceed, by orders of 
magnitude, lead emissions almost anywhere else in the country. According to its TRI 
reports, the Freeport smelter is the single worst lead emitter of any kind in the entire 
country.15 
It is long past time to finally require copper smelters to reduce their toxic emissions 
by the maximum achievable degree. Far greater reductions than EPA proposes are both 
technologically and economically feasible. To provide just one example, EPA states that 
the Freeport smelter could reduce its emissions of metals by 7.6 tons by installing a wet 
electrostatic precipitator (“wet ESP”) on its main stack.16 This single reduction measure at 
an emissions point EPA describes as “contributing significantly to risk at Freeport” would 
eliminate more than one third of the entire category’s total hazardous air pollutant 
emissions and substantially reduce the accumulation of lead and other highly toxic 
pollution in the San Carlos Apache Reservation. There is no dispute that the use of a wet 
ESP is technically achievable, and the agency has found that it would cost, on an 
annualized basis, only $4.8 million, less than one tenth of one percent of Freeport’s annual 
revenues.17 
Finally, it bears emphasis that by not requiring achievable reductions in lead and 
other metal emissions from copper smelters, EPA would leave the United States in 
violation of the Heavy Metals Protocol of the Convention on Long-Range Transboundary 
Air Pollution, to which the United States is a signatory.18 
II. 
EPA’s Proposed Technology Review 
Clean Air Act § 112(d)(6) requires EPA to review its air toxics standards every 
eight years and revise them “as necessary (taking into account developments in practices, 
processes and control technologies). The purpose of this provision is to ensure “EPA 
maintains source standards compliant with the law and on pace with emerging 
developments that create opportunities to do even better.”19 Although the D.C. Circuit has 
 
15 TRI Spreadsheet showing emissions of 100 worst lead emitters. Ex. A hereto. 
16 87 Fed. Reg. at 1643. 
17 EPA, Evaluation of Beyond-the-floor and Ample Margin of Safety Control Options and 
Costs for Process Fugitive Emissions from Smelting Furnaces and Converters, and for 
Point Source Emissions from Anode Refining Furnaces and for the Combined Emissions 
Stream Emitted from the Freeport Aisle Scrubber (November 16, 2020), EPA-HQ-OAR-
2020-0430-0061 (“AMOS Memo”), at 6-7. See also 87 Fed. Reg. at 1635 (showing that 
$1,558,000 is just 0.016 percent of the annual revenue of Freeport’s ultimate parent 
company). 
18 https://unece.org/sites/default/files/2021-10/1998.Heavy_.Metals.e.pdf 
19 Louisiana Environmental Action Network v. EPA, 955 F.3d 1088, 1093 (D.C. Cir. 2020) 

5 
 
held that § 112(d)(6) does not require EPA to recalculate the statutory minimum 
stringencies (“floors”) of its emission standards every eight years, the mandate to revise 
them “as necessary” does require EPA “to ‘revise’ an emission standard “as necessary” to 
bring it into compliance with the Act’s own definition in section 112(d) (1)-(3) of a 
minimally adequate ‘emission standard.’”20 The Act creates a clear statutory obligation for 
standards that reduce each listed hazardous air pollutant by the maximum degree that is 
achievable.21 Thus, in its § 112(d)(6) rulemakings, EPA must, at a minimum, ensure that 
its standards for a source category include limits for each hazardous air pollutant that 
category emits and that these limits require the “maximum” degree of reduction in 
emissions of these hazardous air pollutants that is “achievable” considering cost.22  
EPA does not propose to strengthen the standards in its § 112(d)(6) review all. The 
agency’s stated rationale is that “[w]ith regard to the emissions sources at major primary 
copper smelting facilities, including sources of fugitive dust emissions, the Agency did 
not identify any developments in practices, processes, or control technologies beyond those 
described under the ample margin of safety analysis above.”23 EPA also states there have 
been “no developments in practices, processes, or control technologies were identified that 
would reduce HAP emissions from copper concentrate dryers, smelting furnaces, slag 
cleaning vessels, matte drying and grinding, copper converting, secondary gas systems, and 
fugitive emission sources.”24 
EPA’s failure to strengthen its standards under § 112(d)(6) would be unlawful and 
arbitrary for at least two reasons. First, there are “developments in practices and processes 
and control technologies” as EPA itself defines the term. Second, EPA’s professed belief 
that there are no developments, even if correct, would not excuse the agency from bringing 
its emission limits into compliance with the Clean Air Act. 
EPA takes the position that the following things are considered “developments”: 
 
• 
Any add-on control technology or other equipment that was not identified and 
considered during development of the original MACT standards;  
• 
Any improvements in add-on control technology or other equipment (that were 
identified and considered during development of the original MACT standards) that 
could result in significant additional emissions reduction; 
• 
Any work practice or operational procedure that was not identified or considered 
during development of the original MACT standards;  
• 
Any process changes or pollution prevention alternatives that could be broadly 
applied to the industry and that were not identified or considered during 
development of the original MACT standards; and  
 
(“LEAN”). 
20 Id. at 1098. 
21 42 U.S.C. § 7412(d)(1)-(3). 
22 42 U.S.C. § 7412(d)(1)-(2); LEAN, 55 F.3d at 1089 (citing National Lime Ass’n v. EPA, 
233 F.3d 625, 634 (D.C. Cir. 2000). 
23 87 Fed. Reg. at 1645. 
24 EPA, Technology Review for the Primary Copper Smelting Source Category (January 
20, 2021), EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0033 (“Tech Review Memo”) at 21. 

6 
 
• 
Any significant changes in the cost (including cost effectiveness) of applying add-
on control technology or other equipment to affected sources (including controls 
the EPA considered during the development of the original MACT standards).25 
 
Because the Clean Air Act directs EPA to take account of practices, processes and control 
technologies without limitation, EPA’s attempt to narrow the universe of developments it 
must take account of to those it lists is unlawful. 
 
Even accepting EPA’s definition of developments, however, there are important 
developments that would significantly reduce copper smelters’ emissions of hazardous air 
pollutants. 
 
As EPA explains the Kennecott smelter in Utah uses a Outotec smelting and 
converting process that is both continuous and closed.26 EPA states “molten copper matte 
tapped from the Outotec smelting furnace is not transferred as molten material directly to 
the converting vessel as is performed at the two major source smelters. Instead, the matte is 
first quenched with water to form solid granules of copper matte. … Because there are no 
transfers of molten material between the smelting furnace and the continuous copper 
converter, this technology has inherently lower potential HAP emissions than a smelter 
using batch copper converting technology.”27 “Due to the Outotec closed process and lack of 
molten material transfer in open ladles between the smelting, converting, and anode refining 
steps, most process fugitive emissions are eliminated.”28 Of the continuous smelting and 
converting process, EPA states “[t]he design reduces the process fugitive emissions when 
compared to batch converters. With continuous converting there are no transfers of molten 
material via open ladles between smelting, converting, and the anode furnace departments. In 
addition, there are no fugitive emissions associated with the repeated rolling-out of converters 
for charging, skimming, and pouring.”29  
 
The Kennecott smelter then routes emissions from its continuous process to a series 
of control devices, a waste heat boiler (WHB), an electrostatic precipitator (ESP), a wet 
scrubber, a wet ESP, and then the acid plant.30  
 
The Kennecott smelter’s combination of a far superior smelting process and control 
technologies constitute “developments” as EPA itself defines the term. EPA defines 
developments to include both “[a]ny add-on control technology or other equipment that 
was not identified and considered during development of the original MACT standards”  
and “[a]ny improvements in add-on control technology or other equipment (that were 
identified and considered during development of the original MACT standards) that could 
result in significant additional emissions reduction.”31 The Kennecott smelter’s system 
meets both of these tests. EPA itself describes this combination as a “Potentially New or 
 
25 Id. at 1, 19-20. 
26 Tech Review Memo at 17-18. 
27 87 Fed. Reg. at 1620. 
28 Tech Review Memo at 5. 
29 Id. at 7. 
30 Tech Review Memo at 5, 7, 17. 
31 Id. at 5, 19-20. 

7 
 
Improved Control Technology.”32 It was not “identified and considered” as a control 
technology “during development of the original MACT standards.” EPA excluded the 
Kennecott smelter from its floor analysis under § 112(d)(3) and did not consider the 
Outotec continuous system in its beyond-the-floor analysis under § 112(d)(2).33 
 
Further, even if EPA had considered the Kennecott smelter’s system in 2002, which 
it did not, this technology undisputedly could “result in significant emissions reduction.” In 
particular, it “has inherently lower potential HAP emissions than a smelter using batch 
copper converting technology,”34 eliminates most process fugitive emissions.35 
 
Kennecott’s closed and continuous smelting and converting process is also a 
“process change[] or pollution prevention alternative[] that could be broadly applied to the 
industry and that were not identified or considered during development of the original 
MACT standards.”36 EPA does not claim otherwise. 
 
EPA suggests the Kennecott’s process and control technology combination does not 
constitute a development but relies on arguments that are irrelevant under its own definition of 
the term development. Specifically, EPA states “[a] BACT analysis was prepared in 2017 for 
the Kennecott Utah facility as input to Utah’s State Implementation Plan (SIP) and did not 
identify any new major developments in technologies or costs have occurred after 
promulgation of the MACT standards.” EPA then states 
 
The primary copper smelting area source MACT standard (Subpart EEEEEE) 
specifically identifies the Smelter main stack emission performance as MACT for 
copper smelters (existing sources not using batch copper converters). Smelter process 
and emission controlling technologies that contributed to EPA’s designation of the 
modernized Smelter as a separate MACT category for HAP emissions, including off-
gases from furnaces, also contribute to the control of fine particulate and precursor 
emissions. No new major developments in technologies or costs have occurred after 
promulgation of the MACT standards.” (UDAQ, 2018a).37 
 
As EPA states, the 2017 analysis it cites is a “BACT” analysis – i.e., not a MACT 
analysis done for the purpose of § 112 standards. Section 112 MACT standards apply to a 
completely different set of pollutants (the hazardous air pollutants listed in § 112(b)) and 
provide different requirements (the reduction of each listed hazardous air pollutant by the 
“maximum” degree that is “achievable”). EPA does not and cannot claim that the set of 
developments for the purpose of a 2007 BACT standard necessarily encompass all 
developments for the purpose of a 2002 MACT standard, and the record provides no basis for 
any such assumption. 
 
Further, the BACT analysis is of the “area source” (Subpart EEEEE) standards that 
EPA promulgated in 2007, not the major source (Subpart QQQ). EPA’s conclusions about 
 
32 Id. at 16-17. 
33 67 Fed. Reg. 40,478, 40,486 (June 12, 2002).  
34 87 Fed. Reg. at 1620. 
35 Tech Review Memo at 5. 
36 Id. 
37 Id. at 17 (emphasis added). 

8 
 
what constitutes a development for the purpose of the 2007 area source standards do not even 
purport to apply the 2002 major source standards. The latter were promulgated 5 years earlier 
and EPA’s rationale for them is completely different than the rationale if proffered for the 2007 
area source standards. 
 
Assuming for discussion purposes that the Kennecott smelter’s system was evaluated 
for the 2007 area source MACT rule, it was not identified and considered as a means for 
reduction in the 2002 major source rule. Even if it had been, EPA acknowledges it is an 
improvement over the systems used by Asarco and Freeport and could result in significant 
emission reductions.    
 
The individual elements of the Kennecott smelter’s system are also developments 
as EPA defines the term, for all the reasons given above. 
 
The Outotec continuous smelting and conversion process, in particular, is a 
development. It is a technology identified by EPA in the Tech Review Memo and, although 
it was installed before EPA promulgated the 2002 standards, EPA did not identify or 
consider it as a control measure during development of the original MACT standards.38 
Even if EPA had identified and considered the Outotec system as a control measure 
“during development of the original MACT standards,” it undisputedly is an improvement 
over the systems currently used by Asarco and Freeport that could “result in significant 
emissions reduction.” 
 
A wet ESP is also a development within EPA’s definition of the term. EPA did not 
consider them as a control measure in promulgating the 2002 standards. Even if EPA had 
considered wet ESPs as a control measure in promulgating its 2002 standards, modern wet 
ESPs are an improvement in add-on control technology that could result in significant 
additional emissions reduction. As EPA itself points out in its discussion of the ample 
margin of safety under § 112(f)(2), a wet ESP would essentially eliminate emissions of 
metals from the main emission point at the Freeport, the Aisle Scrubber, reducing the 
plants emissions of these pollutants by 7.6 tons each year.39 
 
EPA claims wet ESP “were identified,” is not a “new” technology, and was “in use in 
the industry during development the NESHAP for both major sources and minor sources.”40 
EPA does not specify where wet ESPs are identified in the 2002 rule but, even it had been 
identified there, EPA’s claim that wet ESPs are not a “new” technology is irrelevant under 
EPA’s definition of the term. What matters is whether wet ESP were identified and 
considered during development of the original MACT standards. EPA does not claim wet 
ESPs were “considered” in the development of the 2002 rule, and does not specify any part 
of the 2002 rule in which wet ESP were even “identified.” 
 
In its ample margin of safety analysis under § 112(f)(2), EPA rejects wet ESP based 
on arguments about costs. EPA does not offer any cost rationale for rejecting wet ESP 
 
38 Id. at 16-17, 1, 19-20. 
39 87 Fed. Reg. at 1643; AMOS Memo at 6-7. 
40 Tech Review Memo at 21. 

9 
 
under § 112(d)(6), and the cost arguments it makes under § 112(f)(2) do not apply under 
§ 112(d)(6). 
 
Assuming arguendo that the arguments EPA advances for rejecting a wet ESP in its 
ample margin of safety analysis could be applied to its proposed actions under 112(d)(6), 
those arguments are without merit. Not only are wet ESPs a development under EPA’s 
own definition of the term, standards reflecting the use of wet ESP would be “achievable” 
within the meaning of the Clean Air Act and under EPA’s own approach to implementing 
§ 112(d)(6). 
 
First, there is no dispute that wet ESP are technically achievable; they are already in 
use at copper smelters. Second, the cost of wet ESP does not prevent them from being 
achievable. EPA states that the capital cost of a wet ESP is $36 million, the annualized cost 
is $4.8 million. Elsewhere in the proposal, EPA states that the purported annualized cost of 
the rule for Freeport, $2.3 million, would reflect just “0.016 percent” of the annual revenue 
of the Freeport smelter’s ultimate parent company.41 If $2.3 million is just 0.016 percent of 
it, Freeport’s annual revenue is $14,475,000,000 -- approximately $14.48 billion. The $4.8 
million annualized cost of a wet ESP would reflect only 0.033 percent of Freeport’s 
annualized revenue, and Freeport could easily afford it. Thus it is achievable economically 
as well. 
 
EPA also states that that the cost of installing a wet ESP on Freeport’s Aisle 
Scrubber per ton of metal hazardous air pollution removed is $632,000.42 That number is 
based on dividing EPA’s estimate of the annualized cost, $4.8 million by the EPA’s 
estimate the resulting annual reductions in metal hazardous air pollutants, 7.6 tons.43 
Although the cost per ton of a emission limit is not relevant to whether that limit is 
“achievable” – let alone whether it reflects the “maximum” degree of reduction that is 
achievable – EPA has regularly used cost per ton as a cost measure in determining whether 
to set beyond the floor standards. In the past, EPA has found far higher cost per ton to be 
acceptable for metal hazardous air pollutant reductions. Specifically, as EPA notes in the 
proposal, it has found that a cost per ton of $1.3 million (in 2009 dollars) is acceptable for 
metal hazardous air pollutants (mostly lead, just as here).44 EPA does not claim, let alone 
explain, why it would not regard $632,000 per ton acceptable given that it has already 
found that $1.3 million – more than twice as much – for reducing metal hazardous air 
pollutants. 
 
Instead, EPA relies on inaccurate characterizations of the capital cost, annual cost, 
and cost-per-ton of a wet ESP in rejecting limits based on this technology in it ample 
margin of safety analysis. Specifically, EPA claims there that the capital cost of a wet ESP 
would be $50 million, the annualized costs would be $13 million, and the “cost-
effectiveness” would be $1.7 million per ton of metal hazardous air pollutants reduced.45 
Those claims are inconsistent with – and far higher than – EPA’s estimate of the cost of 
 
41 87 Fed. Reg. at 1651. 
42 AMOS Memo at 6-7. 
43 Id. 
44 87 Fed. Reg. at 1635. 
45 Id. 

10 
 
installing a wet ESP on the Freeport smelter elsewhere in the AMOS Memo, where EPA 
states the capital cost of a wet ESP is $36 million, the annualized costs would be only $4.8 
million, and the cost per ton would be $632,000 per ton of metal hazardous air pollutants 
reduced.46 Nowhere does EPA explain why it is providing inconsistent and far higher cost 
numbers in the proposal than it provides in the AMOS memo. Nor does it provide any 
support whatsoever for the higher cost numbers in its proposal. 
 
The claims EPA makes in its proposal are not only inconsistent with those in the 
AMOS memo, but also with EPA’s claims about the cost of wet ESPs elsewhere in the 
proposal. In discussing beyond the floor standards for anode refining furnaces, EPA uses 
the same $36 million capital cost and $4.8 million annualized cost numbers that it provides 
in the AMOS memo.47 There, EPA asserts the capital cost of installing two wet ESPS 
would be $72 million and that the annualized cost would be $9.6 million.48 Both numbers 
are exactly twice the cost EPA estimates for installing a single wet ESP, $36 million in 
capital costs and $4.8 million annualized costs. 
 
 
Further, even assuming arguendo that the capital cost of a wet ESP is $50 million 
instead of $36 million as EPA found in the AMOS memo, the agency’s claim that the 
annualized costs are $13 million instead of $4.8 million would be unexplained and 
irrational. The $4.8 million annualized cost EPA provides in the AMOS Memo and in its 
discussion of beyond the floor standards for anode refining is approximately 13 percent of 
the $36 million capital cost EPA provides there. The $13 million annualized cost EPA 
claims in rejecting wet ESPs in its ample margin of safety analysis, however, is 26 percent 
of the $50 million capital cost there. Nowhere does EPA explain why it assumes that 
annualized cost are twice as high, as a percentage of capital costs, than it found in the 
AMOS Memo and in its discussion of beyond the floor standards for anode refining. 
 
 
Moreover, even if the $50 million capital cost and $13 million annualized cost 
claims EPA makes in the proposal were supported by record evidence and not directly 
undermined by EPA’s statements elsewhere in the record, but see supra, even an 
annualized cost of $13 million would reflect less than 0.09 percent – less than one tenth of 
one percent – of Freeport’s $14.8 billion annual revenues. Thus, it would still be 
economically achievable.    
 
Even if there had been no developments in practices, processes and control 
technologies, but see supra, § 112(d)(6) requires EPA to “to ‘revise’ an emission standard 
“as necessary” to bring it into compliance with the Act’s own definition in section 112(d) 
(1)-(3) of a minimally adequate ‘emission standard.’”49 These requirements include 
reducing each of the listed hazardous air pollutants that a source category emits by the 
maximum achievable degree. 
 
EPA’s proposed revisions to its copper smelters standards do not purport to ensure 
the maximum achievable degree of reduction in emissions of lead, arsenic and the other 
 
46 Id. 
47 87 Fed. Reg. at 1633. 
48 Id. 
49 LEAN, 955 F.3d at 1098. 

11 
 
hazardous air pollutants for which EPA claims PM is a surrogate. Indeed, EPA did not 
even attempt to determine whether they require the maximum achievable degree of 
reduction, relying instead on its unlawful and arbitrary claim that there are no 
developments.  
 
EPA’s standards do not require the “maximum” degree of reduction in lead, 
arsenic, and the other hazardous air pollutants for which EPA uses PM as a surrogate 
because far greater reductions can be achieved through the use of the Kennecott smelter’s 
Outotec combined smelting and converting system and through the use of wet ESPs. EPA 
does not claim the use of these control measures is not achievable and provides no basis for 
rejecting them in its § 112(d)(6) other than its unlawful and arbitrary claims that they are 
not developments. 
 
As the D.C. Circuit has made plain and as EPA has recognized, § 112(d)(6) 
requires EPA to promulgate limits for any hazardous air pollutants that are emitted by a 
source category and not already subject to limits.50 EPA’s proposal violates this 
requirement. 
 
EPA proposes new limits for mercury and certain previously unregulated emission 
points at copper smelters.51 Commenters support this aspect of this proposal but note that 
EPA’s approach to standard-setting leaves many of the new limits meaningless. 
 
EPA proposes a beyond the floor standard for mercury based on the emission 
reductions that can be achieved with activated carbon injection. EPA estimates this limit 
would result in a 90 percent reduction of the Freeport’s acid plant, which accounts for 64 
percent of the category’s total mercury emissions.52 If these estimates are correct, EPA’s 
new limit will reduce the category’s total emissions by about 58 percent. Commenters 
support this reduction. However, EPA must set mercury limits for all the emission points 
that emit mercury. Because Freeport’s acid plant accounts for only 64 percent of the 
category’s total mercury emissions, there are plainly other emission points that account for 
the other 36 percent. EPA must set mercury emission limits for these emission points as 
well. 
 
EPA also proposes a beyond the floor limit for fugitive particulate matter (PM) 
emissions from the anode refining process.53 EPA estimates this limit will reduce fugitive 
emissions of lead and arsenic from the Freeport smelter by 4.25 tpy, or approximately 81 
percent.54 Although 4.25 tons of lead and arsenic is only a relatively small portion of the 
toxic pollution emitted by Freeport in particular and the two smelters located near the San 
Carlos Apache Reservation more generally, eliminating these emissions is an important 
step in the right direction. Commenters support this reduction. 
 
 
50 Id. 955 F.3d 1089, 1098; 87 Fed. Reg. at 1620 (citing LEAN). 
51 87 Fed. Reg. at 1632. 
52 Id. at 1636. 
53 Id. at 1634-1635. 
54 Id. 

12 
 
EPA also proposes PM limits for point source emissions from anode refining, 
fugitive emissions from converters and smelters, and point source emissions from new 
converters. Because of EPA’s standard setting approach, these standards will achieve no 
reductions at all. EPA confirms this point by estimating that its rule, as a whole, will 
achieve reductions of 4.26 tpy – i.e., no more than is achieved by its limit for fugitive 
emissions from anode furnaces and its mercury limit.55 
 
One reason that the PM limits for point source emissions from anode refining, 
fugitive emissions from converters and smelters, and point source emissions from new 
converters achieve no reductions standards is that EPA set them at the statutory minimum 
stringency required by § 112(d)(3). This provision requires floors to be no less stringent 
than the average emission level achieved by the best performing five sources, and EPA 
considered emissions only from the two major sources, Freeport and Asarco.56  
 
Compounding the problem, EPA did not even gather emissions data for both major 
sources. In each instance where it set limits at the floor, EPA says it has information for 
only one source, the Freeport plant.57 EPA’s failure to gather information for both of the 
two major sources contravenes the Clean Air Act, is arbitrary, and shows contempt for the 
statute and the people Congress enacted it to protect.  
 
When EPA sets existing source standards for categories with fewer than 30 sources, 
it must base limits on “the average emission limitation achieved by the best performing 5 
sources (for which the Administrator has or could reasonably obtain emissions 
information).”58 Although EPA claims it has emissions information for only one smelter, 
the agency does not claim it cannot reasonably obtain emissions information for the other. 
Indeed, any such claim would be implausible. EPA would need to gather data for only one 
other smelter (or two, if the agency included the Kennecott smelter in its floor 
calculations). The agency has ample authority to gather these data.59 The simple and 
regrettable reality is that, after delaying its residual risk and technology review for copper 
smelters for more than a decade after the statutory deadline, EPA did not even bother to 
require emissions testing from any smelter. 
 
EPA’s floors are unlawful because they are not based on the average emission 
limitation achieved by the best performing 5 sources for which the Administrator has or 
could reasonably obtain emissions information. They are also arbitrary because EPA does 
not even consider its statutory obligation makes no effort whatsoever to square its failure to 
obtain information with § 112(d)(3)(B). 
 
 
55 Id. at 1650. 
56 42 U.S.C. § 7412(d)(3); EPA, MACT Floor Analysis for the Primary Copper Smelting 
Source Category (November 27, 2020), EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0055. 
57 87 Fed. Reg. at 1632-1636. 
58 42 U.S.C. § 7412(d)(3)(B) (emphasis added). 
59 42 U.S.C. § 7414. See U.S. Sugar v. EPA, 830 F.3d 579, 644 (D.C. Cir. 2016). 

13 
 
EPA’s new source floors are unlawful as well. Section 112(d)(3) requires new 
source floors to reflect the emission level achieved by the single best performing source.60 
EPA has emissions information for only one of the two major source copper smelters and 
no idea whether that source is the “single best performing” one. EPA does not even claim 
that the source for which it has emissions information, the Freeport smelter, is the single 
best performing source, and it offers no record basis to support any such claim. 
 
If anything, the record indicates that the source for which EPA does not have 
emissions information, the Asarco smelter, is the better performing source with at least 
some of the emission points for which EPA is setting new limits. Asarco’s self-reported 
total emissions of lead to EPA’s Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) are far lower than 
Freeport’s, the source for which EPA says it has emissions information.61  
 
EPA’s failure to base its new source standards on the emission level actually 
achieved by the single best performing source is flatly unlawful. Further, EPA’s failure to 
confront an important aspect of the problem – that it does not actually know whether the 
source for which it happens to have emissions information is the best performer – is 
arbitrary. And, although EPA does not claim that source on which it based its new floors is 
the single best performer, any such claim would be arbitrary because it is completely 
unsupported by record evidence and refuted by the sources’ TRI reports. 
 
EPA must use its § 114 authority to gather all the emissions data it needs to set 
lawful non-arbitrary limits for the emission points it previously failed to regulate. In doing 
so, EPA should be cognizant that its failure to set limits for these emission points was 
unlawful when EPA first promulgated emission standards for copper smelters in 2002 and 
that the agency has now deprived people of legally mandated protection from toxic air 
pollution for more than 20 years. EPA needs to remedy this situation, and setting do-
nothing limits now adds insult to injury. 
 
Beyond EPA’s arbitrary and unlawful floor approach, it should be plain to the 
agency that Congress did not intend it to set meaningless standards whenever it regulates a 
source category with only a few sources. EPA could prevent this outcome by not using its 
“upper prediction limit” (“UPL”), which produces a number that is worse than the worst 
measured emission level at any source. EPA could also set standards that truly reflect that 
“maximum” degree of reduction that is “achievable” considering cost, as required by 
§ 112(d)(2)(B). By failing to do either of these things, however, EPA produces limits that 
require no reductions at all. 
 
 
60 42 U.S.C. § 7412(d)(3); U.S. Sugar, 830 F.3d at 594 (“For new sources—those built 
after promulgation of a HAPs limit, see 42 U.S.C. § 7412(a)(4)—the MACT floor cannot 
be less stringent than the emissions levels achieved by the best performing similar 
source.”).  
61 TRI Spreadsheets showing Freeport’s and Asarco’s reported emissions of lead 
compounds, Ex. A hereto. 

14 
 
EPA rejects beyond the floor standards for point source emissions from anode 
refining based on its claim that costs of installing a wet ESP would be “relatively high” and 
that the cost-effectiveness would be “poor.”62  
 
The question EPA must answer under Clean Air Act § 112(d)(2) is not whether it 
thinks the costs of a limit are “relatively high” or the cost-effectiveness “poor,” but 
whether it reflects the “maximum” degree of reduction that is “achievable” considering 
costs.63 EPA does not even attempt to answer this question and does not even claim that its 
proposed limit for point source emissions from anode refining reflects the maximum 
achievable degree of reduction. For this reason alone, its proposed limit is unlawful and 
arbitrary. 
 
Had EPA determined the maximum degree of reduction that is “achievable,” rather 
than a level at which EPA thinks the cost per ton is “relatively high” or “poor,” it is 
difficult to imagine that the agency would have rejected a beyond-the-floor limit on cost 
grounds. Elsewhere in the proposal EPA states that the purported annualized cost of the 
rule for Freeport, $2.3 million, would reflect just “0.016 percent” of the annual revenue of 
the Freeport smelter’s ultimate parent company.64 If $2.3 million is just 0.016 percent of it, 
Freeport’s annual revenue is $14,475,000,000 -- approximately $14.48 billion. The $4.8 
million annualized cost of a wet ESP would reflect only 0.033 percent of Freeport’s 
annualized revenue, and Freeport could easily afford it. EPA provides no revenue estimate 
for Asarco and, thus, no reason to believe it is not also achievable for Asarco. 
 
EPA’s rejection of a beyond the floor standard based on its claim that cost-
effectiveness is poor is arbitrary for at least two reasons. First, EPA admits it does not 
know how much a wet ESP would reduce emissions from anode refining. To rejecting this 
measure on cost-effectiveness grounds is nothing more than speculation. 
 
Second, EPA’s rejection of wet ESP technology rests on its assumption that the 
smelters would install separate wet ESPs on each different emission point – i.e. one to 
control point source emissions from anode refining operations and another one to control 
point source emissions from converters. EPA itself states that both the Freeport and Asarco 
smelters already “have many combined gas streams that vent to a common control system 
and/or stack” and that “at Asarco, the exhaust gases from the dryers, smelting furnace, 
converters, anode furnaces and acid plant are all ultimately vented to the main stack.”65 
Record evidence that multiple emission sources can be – and are – routed to the same 
control system and stack, it makes no sense to assume that the cost of a wet ESP should be 
measured against emission reductions from just one emission source. Assuming that cost 
per ton is a relevant metric for beyond the floor standards, EPA needs to compare the cost 
of a wet ESP against the total reduction if all emission sources were routed through it. The 
agency offers no reason to believe that the smelters could not and would not install a single 
wet ESP to control point source emissions from more than one emission point, as they 
already have done with other control technology. If EPA had considered this solution, it 
 
62 87 Fed. Reg. at 1633. 
63 42 U.S.C. § 7412(d)(2). 
64 87 Fed. Reg. at 1651. 
65 RRA, Appendix 1 at A-3. 

15 
 
would have recognized that the emission reductions achieved through wet ESPs would be a 
combined reduction of emissions from multiple points. 
 
EPA identifies several pollutants for which its current standards lack emission 
limits, including hexane, formaldehyde, toluene, benzene, p-dichlorobenzene, and 
naphthalene.66 The agency states that although emissions of these pollutants have been 
reported in the National Emissions Inventory (NEI), it does not actually know whether 
copper smelters emit them or in what quantity they may be emitted.67 EPA apparently 
made no independent effort to disprove the NEI data indicating that copper smelters do 
emit these pollutants. Nonetheless, EPA does not propose limits for any of them. 
 
The Clean Air Act unambiguously requires EPA to set limits for each hazardous air 
pollutant that a source category emits.68 It does not excuse EPA from meeting this 
obligation just because the agency has chosen not to test for a pollutant and, therefore, does 
not know for certain whether it is emitted. It is EPA’s obligation to gather the data it needs 
to set lawful standards.69 That obligation includes gathering emissions data to determine 
which pollutants a category emits and to set limits for them. 
 
EPA’s failure to meet its obligation to set limits for listed hazardous air pollutants 
that copper smelters emits is egregious with respect to dioxins. EPA’s proposal neither sets 
limits for dioxins nor even mentions them, leaving the public to believe that copper 
smelters do not emit them. Yet Freeport has been reporting significant emissions of dioxins 
to EPA’s Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) every year for more than 20 years.70 Moreover, 
the European Environment Agency has found that copper smelters emit dioxins in 
significant quantities, 0.01 micrograms (TEQ) per metric ton of copper produced, as well 
as 3.7 micrograms of PCBs per metric ton of copper produced.71 In 2018, primary copper 
smelters in the U.S. produced 536,000 metric tons of copper.72 At this rate copper smelters  
emitted 5,360 micrograms TEQ of dioxins and 1,983,200 micrograms of PCBs. Not only 
did EPA not test copper smelters for dioxin emissions, it did not even consult its own TRI 
database or consider other evidence, such as the European Environment Agency’s report, 
showing that they do emit dioxins.. 
 
EPA has a clear statutory obligation to set limits for coppers smelters emissions of, 
at a minimum, dioxins, hexane, formaldehyde, toluene, benzene, p-dichlorobenzene, and 
 
66 EPA, Residual Risk Assessment for the Primary Copper Smelting Source Category in 
Support of the 2021 Risk and Technology Review Proposed Rule (February 2021), EPA-
HQ-OAR-2020-0430 (RRA) at 39-40 and Appendix 1 at A-5. 
67 Id., Appendix 1 at A-5, n.7. 
68 LEAN, 55 F.3d at 1089 (citing National Lime Ass’n v. EPA, 233 F.3d 625, 634 (D.C. Cir. 
2000). 
69 U.S. Sugar Corp. v. EPA, 830 F.3d 579, 644 (D.C. Cir. 2016).  
70 TRI Spreadsheet showing Freeport-McMoran’s emissions of dioxins, Ex. A hereto. 
71 European Environment Agency Report on Copper Production (2019), Ex. B. hereto, at 
12-13. 
72 EPA, Economic Impact Analysis for Proposed Residual Risk and Technology Review of 
the National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Primary Copper 
Smelting Sources (September 2021), EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0058, at 5. 

16 
 
naphthalene. The agency cannot avoid or shirk this obligation just by failing or refusing to 
test for them and pleading ignorance about whether they are actually emitted. To meet its 
obligation, EPA must promptly use its § 114 authority to require the emissions testing it 
needs to set all missing limits. 
III. 
EPA’s Proposed Residual Risk Analysis 
A. EPA Underestimates Copper Smelters’ Emissions. 
 
Because EPA failed to require emissions testing, it does not have actual emissions 
data in sufficient quantities to accurately determine copper smelters’ toxic emissions.  
 
For the Freeport smelter, EPA states that it relies on a small set of emission test 
results provided by the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ).73 EPA 
states it supplemented these data with select data that Asarco and Freeport provided after 
they were invited to comment on the data that were allegedly posted on a website “for 
public review.”74 EPA did not publish notice of the data or otherwise notify commenters of 
the website or the availability of data for comment.75 Only Asarco and Freeport 
commented on the data.76 EPA’s decision to allow only two companies with a financial 
interest in the outcome of the rule to participate in its collection and selection of the data on 
which its proposed rule is based raises serious questions about the integrity and reliability 
of the data and the fairness rulemaking process.  
 
EPA does not claim that the set of data it used for Freeport include data for all the 
emission points at Freeport or all the hazardous air pollutants they emit, and it appears that 
some emission points and pollutants are not included. 
 
Although EPA claims that the emissions data it used for both Freeport and Asarco 
are in the docket,77 most of the relevant data appear to be missing from the docket. 
Commenters were not able to locate either the test results supplied by ADEQ or the test 
results supplied by Freeport in the docket, despite diligent searching and repeated requests 
to EPA for assistance.78 Instead, EPA appears to have provided only its own estimates of 
Freeport’s yearly emissions of certain pollutants from certain emission points based on 
those data.79 Exacerbating the problem, EPA does not say how it derived the yearly 
emission numbers from the data, indicating only that it used “engineering judgment.”80 
Thus, EPA asks commenters to accept its claims about yearly emissions at face value 
 
73 RRA, Appendix 1 at A-2. 
74 Id.  
75 The website to which EPA allegedly posted the data does not function. 
https://www.epa.gov/stationary-sources-air-pollution/primary-copper-smelting-national-
emission-standards-hazardous-air  
76 RRA, Appendix 1 at A-2. 
77 Id. 
78 Commenters’ requests for assistance in locating the emissions data went unanswered, 
Ex. C.  
79 EPA, Industry Review Spreadsheet, EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0038. 
80 Id. 

17 
 
without being able to see either the data they are purportedly based on or how EPA used 
those data to produce its claims.  
 
The Clean Air Act provides:   
 
In the case of any rule to which this subsection applies, notice of proposed 
rulemaking shall be published in the Federal Register, as provided under section 
553(b) of title 5, shall be accompanied by a statement of its basis and purpose and 
shall specify the period available for public comment (hereinafter referred to as the 
“comment period”). The notice of proposed rulemaking shall also state the docket 
number, the location or locations of the docket, and the times it will be open to 
public inspection. The statement of basis and purpose shall include a summary of— 
 
(A)  the factual data on which the proposed rule is based; 
(B)  the methodology used in obtaining the data and in analyzing the data; and 
(C)  the major legal interpretations and policy considerations underlying the 
proposed rule. 
 
The statement shall also set forth or summarize and provide a reference to any 
pertinent findings, recommendations, and comments by the Scientific Review 
Committee established under section 7409(d) of this title and the National 
Academy of Sciences, and, if the proposal differs in any important respect from any 
of these recommendations, an explanation of the reasons for such differences. All 
data, information, and documents referred to in this paragraph on which the 
proposed rule relies shall be included in the docket on the date of publication of the 
proposed rule.81 
 
EPA’s failure to include data on which it claims to rely on the date of publication of the 
proposed copper smelters RTR violates the Clean Air Act.82 Likewise, EPA’s failure to 
show the “methodology” it used to “analyz[e] the data” violates the Act.83 As a practical 
matter, it prevents commenters from evaluating EPA’s claims about copper smelters’ 
yearly emissions and providing fully informed comments on both EPA’s claims about 
copper smelters’ yearly emissions and the risk analysis based on those claims. EPA must 
immediately post in the docket the missing emissions information and an explanation of 
the methodology it used to derive its emission numbers from these data and must reopen 
the comment period for at least 30 days to allow the public to comment on them.  
 
For the Asarco smelter, EPA states that it relies primarily on estimates from the 
National Emissions Inventory (NEI) for 2017, supplemented by some 2019 emissions test 
data that Asarco chose to submit.84 
 
As EPA’s own Office of the Inspector General (“OIG”) warned the agency long 
ago, “[t]he heavy use of emission factors in the [national emissions inventory] makes the 
 
81 42 U.S.C. § 7607(d)(3) (emphasis added). 
82 Id. 
83 Id. 
84 87 Fed. Reg. at 1621; RRA, Appendix 1 at A-2. 

18 
 
reliability of the data highly uncertain. Emission factors can result in emissions data of 
questionable reliability… .”85 EPA’s reliance on NEI data and its failure to even 
acknowledge the flaws in such an approach even though they were clearly identified more 
than a decade ago, is arbitrary.  
 
One concern about EPA’s use of emission factors in the NEI is that the tests used to 
develop emission factors are intentionally conducted on new equipment operating under 
normal conditions because emission factors are formulas that attempt to estimate long-term 
average emissions.86 EPA itself notes that “[p]arameters that can cause short-term 
fluctuations in emissions are generally avoided in testing and not taken into account in test 
evaluation.”87 Further, “[s]ources often are tested more frequently when they are new and 
when they are believed to be operating properly, and either situation may bias the 
results.”88 
 
Here, it is not even clear how emissions of copper smelters’ hazardous air pollutant 
emissions could be generated for NEI, let alone how such estimates could possibly be 
regarded as reliable for the purposes of estimating risk. As noted in the Inspector General 
report, the purported basis for NEI estimates is testing of equipment. But, with the 
exception of the few test results provided by ADEQ, Freeport and Asarco, copper smelters 
have not been tested for hazardous air pollutant emissions. Therefore there are no test data 
upon which NEI estimates could be based with any credibility. 
 
Although EPA claims to have relied on the NEI estimates for Asarco, it did not 
place these estimates in the docket. Further, EPA does not explain how it combines NEI 
estimates for Asarco with the Asarco-supplied emissions data to reach its claims about 
Asarco’s yearly emissions. As explained above with regard to the ADEQ data and the 2019 
emissions data supplied by Freeport, EPA’s failure the post the NEI estimates and the 2019 
emissions data supplied by Asarco in the docket at the time it issued the proposed RTR 
violates Clean Air Act § 307(d)(3).89 Likewise, EPA does not provide the methodology by 
which it used the NEI emission estimates and the Asarco-supplied data to reach its claims 
about Asarco’s yearly emissions. EPA must immediately post in the docket the missing 
NEI emission estimates, the missing emissions data, and an explanation of the 
methodology EPA used to derive yearly emission numbers from those data. EPA also must 
reopen the comment period for at least 30 days to allow the public to comment on them. 
 
For both Freeport and Asarco, the agency’s acceptance and use of limited data these 
companies selected and then chose to submit to the record is troubling, given EPA’s failure 
to require any mandatory emissions testing and its failure to include the public in its review 
 
85 EPA OIG, Improvements in Air Toxics Emissions Data Needed to Conduct Residual Risk 
Assessments at 18 (Oct. 31, 2007), https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-
11/documents/20071031-08-p-0020.pdf (emphasis added), Ex. B hereto.   
86 EPA, AP-42: Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors, Vol. 1: Stationary Point 
and Area Sources at 4-5, https://www.epa.gov/air-emissions-factors-and-quantification/ap-
42-compilation-air-emission-factors.    
87 Id. 
88 Id. at 2-3 (emphasis added). 
89 42 U.S.C. § 7607(d)(3). 

19 
 
of the data. EPA does not provide any basis to believe the data supplied by these 
companies is representative and not cherry-picked to create the impression that their 
emissions are lower than they actually are.  
 
EPA states that it chose to use so-called “actual” emissions data rather than 
“allowable” emissions data to estimate copper smelters’ emissions.90 Much of the “data” 
EPA describes as “actual” emissions data, however, are mostly not actual emissions data at 
all, but NEI estimates with all the flaws described above. Given the scarcity of truly 
“actual” emissions data for copper smelters and the established unreliability of NEI data, 
EPA should use “allowable” data – as it agrees it can and has in other rulemakings.91 
Nowhere does EPA explain its choice to use the flawed set of so-called “actual” data in this 
rulemaking instead of allowable data. 
 
Underscoring the flaws in EPA’s emissions estimates is the gap between them and 
the emissions that both Asarco and Freeport submitted to TRI. For example, EPA estimates 
that both facilities together emit 13.47 tpy of lead compounds. In 2018, however, Freeport 
alone reported emitting 29 tons of lead compounds. Asarco reported emitting more than 1.8 
tons of lead, even though it operated for only part of the year. Thus, the companies’ own 
reports indicate they emitted more than 30 tons of lead compounds that year – i.e., 
substantially more than twice the amount EPA estimates.92 EPA does not even 
acknowledge the TRI reports, let alone explain why it uses emission estimates that are so 
much lower than the emissions reported by the facilities. 
 
Another troublesome inconsistency stems from the relatively low level of arsenic 
EPA assumes is in smelters’ emissions. Whereas EPA assumes that smelters emit 13 tons 
of lead and 2 tons of arsenic each year for a ratio of 2/13 or 15.4 percent, the European 
Environment Agency has found that the ratio is 4/19, or 21.1 percent.93  
 
Given all of these flaws, EPA’s low emission estimates are arbitrary and capricious. 
B. EPA Underestimates Exposures to Copper Smelters’ Toxic Emissions. 
 EPA’s RTR only analyzed lead exposures through inhalation, yet it is clear that 
when lead is deposited onto soils and then retrained into the environment those emissions 
result in contamination of the food chain, surface waters, residential interiors via track-in 
and children through hand-to-mouth activities of young children who ingest dust particles. 
By EPA only calculating inhalation risk, EPA grossly underestimates the exposures to lead 
in the communities hosting these copper smelters and the San Carlos Reservation.94 
 
90 RRA, Appendix 1 at A-10 – A-11. 
91 Id. 
92 TRI Spreadsheets showing Freeport’s and Asarco’s emissions of lead compounds, Ex. A 
hereto. 
93 European Environment Agency Report on Copper Production (2019), Ex. B. hereto, at 
10-11. 
94 Chapter 3, Toxicokinetics, Susceptible Populations, Biomarkers, Chemical Interactions, 
https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp13-c3.pdf  

20 
 
USEPA itself developed the IEUBK model specifically to estimate the exposures to 
lead from the multi-pathways it takes in the environment as it is deposited on soil.  It is 
shocking that for this risk assessment EPA is refusing to use it and therefore grossly 
underestimating risk by only looking at the inhalation pathway.95 
There is a lack of adequate ambient air monitors in this airshed; there are no air 
monitors located on the San Carlos Apache Reservation, yet they are directly downwind of 
two huge air pollution sources, despite a duty in the Clean Air Act to monitor near the 
highest-emitting sources. This lack of adequate monitoring hampers both the agency’s and 
the public’s ability to quantify the risk from these facilities in the deposition zone for lead 
and arsenic emissions from all three of these copper smelters. 
There are questionable lead NAAQS monitoring data for the Freeport smelter. For 
example, EPA assumes the Freeport smelter is in compliance with the lead NAAQS even 
though its TRI reports indicate that it’s emitting much more lead than the Asarco smelter, 
which is violating both the lead NAAQS and the SOX NAAQS.96 EPA’s assumption that 
the Freeport analysis is in compliance with the lead NAAQS and failure to consider this 
assumption in light of Freeport’s TRI reports is arbitrary. 
Also arbitrary is EPA’s failure to explain why the modeled levels of lead are so far 
below the actual monitored levels.97 EPA’s assumption that its modeled levels are correct 
even though they are so far below monitored levels is arbitrary. 
EPA acknowledges that Freeport’s lead emissions are very high when it recycles 
acid plant sludge and/or uses the anode utility vessel.98 EPA, “assum[es],” however, these 
practices occur only 7 weeks out of a 104 week period.99 The agency then proceeds to 
“weight” its estimate of Freeport’s total emissions based on that assumption. Nowhere in 
the record does EPA indicate how it knows that Freeport does not recycle acid plant sludge 
or use the anode utility vessel more often or provide a record basis for making that 
assumption, which substantially reduces its emission estimate. EPA’s weighting approach, 
and its resulting emissions and risk calculations are arbitrary for these reason as well. 
EPA states that to determine exposure it combined monitoring data from 2019 with 
meteorological data from 2012-2013.100 The weather prevailing in 2019 may have driven 
far greater exposures as a result of the 2019 emissions than the weather in 2012-2013 
would have driven. In particular EPA does not explain why it used data from the wrong 
year or what effect this had. EPA does not claim, and could not claim, that getting 
meteorological data from the correct year was impossible; there is a weather station in 
 
95 Advancing Pb Exposure and Biokinetic Modeling for U.S. EPA Regulatory Decisions 
and Site Assessments Using Bunker Hill Mining and Metallurgical Complex Superfund 
Site Data, EPA, https://cfpub.epa.gov/ncea/risk/recordisplay.cfm?deid=351563  
96 Sean Reilly, Copper company sues EPA over lead, SO2 compliance, GreenWire (April 
6, 2022) https://subscriber.politicopro.com/article/eenews/2022/04/06/copper-company-
sues-epa-over-lead-so2-compliance-00023365  
97 RRA, Appendix 1 at A-15. 
98 Id. at A-7 – A-8. 
99 Id. at A-9. 
100 Id. at A-13 – A-14. 

21 
 
Globe, AZ. EPA’s use of weather data from a time when the monitored emissions were not 
actually happening is arbitrary, as is EPA’s total failure to explain its use of those data 
instead of data for the correct time period. 
EPA never explains, much less examines, what conclusions can be drawn about the 
behavior of lead from copper smelters from ambient monitored lead emissions near Hayden 
during the Asarco shutdown. When this facility is shut down, it will still be emitting lead 
from fugitive emissions. For example, the retired Exide lead smelters in Vernon, CA has 
fenceline monitors for lead surrounding it, and is still emitting lead.  EPA could get a very 
good idea how much lead is being emitted from production activities by examining how 
much lead is being emitted during the shutdown. Subtracting the “background lead 
emissions” produced while the facility was non-operational would allow EPA to develop 
an emissions factor for fugitives when the facility is operational. EPA’s failure to 
determine the background levels of lead in the air is arbitrary and renders its conclusions 
about ambient lead levels, exposure levels, and risk arbitrary. 
C. EPA’s Assumption That Risks from Lead Exposure Are Acceptable If 
They Do Not Exceed the Lead NAAQS Is Unlawful and Arbitrary. 
All of the metal hazardous air pollutants that copper smelters emit are persistent in 
the environment. So too are dioxins, PAHs, POMs, Lead, arsenic, cadmium, dioxins and 
other hazardous air pollutants that copper smelters emitted. All these long-lived, persistent 
pollutants emitted years and even decades ago, persist in water and soil even now. 
The Freeport and Asarco smelters have both been emitting these persistent 
hazardous air pollutants from sites bordering the San Carlos Apache reservation for more 
than a century. During that time lead, arsenic and other persistent poisons have built up in 
the soil of the San Carlos Apache reservation. It is well known that the soil in Hayden is 
badly contaminated with lead.101 Some of the Lead emissions from the Hayden and Miami 
Arizona smelters are lofted into the air by their tall stacks and then deposited on nearby 
communities such as the San Carlos Apache Reservation.102 There is strong reason, 
therefore, to believe that, after more than a century of emissions from the Asarco and 
Freeport smelters, lead, arsenic, cadmium, dioxins and other persistent pollutants have 
accumulated both on the San Carlos Apache Reservation and in other areas near the these 
smelters.  
One of the main pathways by which children are exposed to lead, in particular, is 
through contact with lead-contaminated soil. EPA did not even attempt to evaluate the risks 
resulting from exposure to lead through drinking water, eating food, and contact with soil. 
EPA states “[i]n evaluating the potential multipathway risk from emissions of lead 
 
101 Howard Berkes, EPA Takes Action Against Toxic Arizona Copper Plant (Nov. 17, 
2011) https://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2011/11/17/142439081/epa-takes-action-
against-toxic-arizona-copper-plant 
102Atmospheric deposition of arsenic, cadmium, copper, lead, and zinc near an operating 
and an abandoned lead smelter, EPA, 
https://cfpub.epa.gov/si/si_public_record_report.cfm?dirEntryId=350820&Lab=CESER&s
implesearch=0&showcriteria=2&sortby=pubDate&timstype=&datebeginpublishedpresente
d=12/28/2019  

22 
 
compounds, rather than developing a screening threshold emission rate, we compare 
maximum estimated chronic inhalation exposure concentrations to the level of the current 
National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) for lead. Values above the level of the 
primary (health-based) lead NAAQS are considered to have a potential for multipathway 
risk.103 For this source category modeled max 3-month concentration were just above the 
NAAQS standard for lead as discussed above.”104   
“[C]hronic inhalation exposures” do not begin to fully reflect the exposure or the 
risks faced by people who live near the Asarco and Freeport smelters. EPA’s blanket 
assumption that ambient air levels below the lead NAAQS are safe is unlawful and 
arbitrary.  It is especially galling to note that these smelters have operated now for over a 
century, and have emitted hundreds of tons into the surrounding environment that also 
contribute to the exposure exposome of the nearby towns and the San Carlos Apache tribal 
members.  Lead laden dust from historic deposition can become resuspended in the 
ambient air during wind episodes and contribute to the further exposure of the surrounding 
residents.  This resuspension of lead dust is a known and well studies phenomenon that 
contributes to childhood lead poisoning in our nation’s inner cities each summer.105  
Indeed, in Flint, Michigan the children are not only affected by the lead in drinking 
water, but also by resuspended lead from lead-contaminated soils from old industrial 
sources and other urban lead sources such as the use of leaded gasoline, leaded paint, and 
other emissions. 106 
There is a direct correlation between lead in topsoil and blood lead levels in 
children.  A notable study in New Orleans followed the decline in lead in topsoils in New 
Orleans and the corresponding decline in blood lead levels (BLLs) in children post 
Hurricane Katrina.   
“Lead (Pb) is extremely toxic and a major cause of chronic diseases worldwide. Pb 
is associated with health disparities, particularly within low-income populations. In 
biological systems, Pb mimics calcium and, among other effects, interrupts cell signaling. 
Furthermore, Pb exposure results in epigenetic changes that affect multigenerational gene 
expression. Exposure to Pb has decreased through primary prevention, including removal 
of Pb solder from canned food, regulating lead-based paint, and especially eliminating Pb 
additives in gasoline. While researchers observe a continuous decline in children’s blood 
lead (BPb), reservoirs of exposure persist in topsoil, which stores the legacy dust from 
leaded gasoline and other sources. Our surveys of metropolitan New Orleans reveal that 
median topsoil Pb in communities (n = 274) decreased 44% from 99 mg/kg to 54 mg/kg 
(P value of 2.09 × 10−08), with a median depletion rate of ∼2.4 mg⋅kg⋅y−1 over 15 y. From 
 
103 RRA at 8 (emphasis added). 
104 Id. 
105 Gabriel Filippelli, Resuspension of urban soils as a persistent source of lead poisoning 
in children: A review and new directions, 
https://www.academia.edu/es/21319572/Resuspension of urban soils as a persistent so
urce_of_lead_poisoning_in_children_A_review_and_new_directions 
106 Mark A.S. Laidlaw, Children’s Blood Lead Seasonality in Flint, Michigan (USA), and 
Soil-Sourced Lead Hazard Risks (April 2016) 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4847020/  

23 
 
2000 through 2005 to 2011 through 2016, children’s BPb declined from 3.6 μg/dL to 1.2 
μg/dL or 64% (P value of 2.02 × 10−85), a decrease of ∼0.2 μg⋅dL⋅y−1 during a median of 
12 y[ears].”107 
Moreover, a recent study at a former lead smelter in Omaha, NE found a significant 
correlation between the remediation of lead-contaminated soils and declines in childhood 
blood lead levels as well.   
“Even low-level lead exposures are associated with decrements in cognitive 
function in young children; specifically, effects on cognition are observed in populations 
with group mean BLLs <5μg/dL. Although contemporary BLLs in the United States are 
lower on average than they were in the past, lead from anthropogenic sources persists in the 
environment, and children are potentially exposed from legacy sources. No threshold for 
lead-related cognitive effects in children has been identified.”108 
The Omaha Lead Superfund Site (OLSS) was contaminated by emissions from a 
lead smelter and refining facility that operated for approximately 125 years until its closure 
in 1997. Other sources of lead contamination at the site include a former paint 
manufacturer, lead battery plant, and lead-based paint. The Agency for Toxic Substances 
and Disease Registry (ATSDR) conducted a public health assessment from July 2000 
through August 2002 and found that 9.7% of the children 0–6 y old in Omaha had BLLs 
greater than 10μg/dL10μg/dL109 “whereas this proportion was 3.1% in U.S. children overall 
at the time. In 2003, the OLSS was officially designated a Superfund site under the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act and was 
included on the National Priorities List of contaminated sites.”110 
This conclusion is very important to note, because the San Carlos Apache nation 
and the residents of the towns near these three copper smelters have already been exposed 
to a century of lead emissions as host to one of world’s greatest regional lead hotspots.  The 
reservoir of lead-contaminated soils around both of these smelters creates the background 
lead exposome to which the new lead emissions from these smelters will be added.   
The declines of blood lead levels in children witnessed in New Orleans post Katrina 
are very illustrative of the public health benefits of lead exposure reduction.  To be pointed, 
since 3.9 points (60%) of the IQ loss in children occurs between 2.4-10 
micrograms/deciliter of blood these reductions in BLL documented in New Orleans are 
extremely significant and have a large material positive effect on the affected populations.  
111 
 
107 Howard W. Mielke, The concurrent decline of soil lead and children’s blood lead in 
New Orleans, https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/pnas.1906092116 
108 R.L. Canfield, Environmental lead exposure and children’s cognitive function (Dec. 
2005) https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4675165/  
109 Dongni Ye, et al., Estimating the Effects of Soil Remediation on Children’s Blood Lead 
near a Former Lead Smelter in Omaha, Nebraska, USA (Mar. 23, 2022) (internal citations 
omitted) https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/10.1289/EHP8657#c1  
110 Id.  
111 https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/full/10.1289/ehp.7688  

24 
 
As well, at federal Superfund sites (like the Asarco smelter) the Integrated Exposure 
Uptake BioKenetic Model (IEUBK)is used to estimate lead exposure to children.  The 
model is an EPA model used to estimate lead exposure in children using different exposure 
scenarios that are supposed to mimic the lead exposome of a given population.  This model 
clearly uses many different inputs to estimate lead exposures: food intake, drinking water 
consumption, maternal blood lead concentrations using NHANES  data, soil/dust inhalation 
parameters, and inhalation. 112 If EPA is serious about evaluating the risks to people who 
live near copper smelters, it needs to measure their actual exposure through all pathways 
and determine they levels to which they are suffering from lead poisoning already.113 
Again, compared to the IEUBK model, which EPA uses extensively to model risk 
from lead exposure, the inhalation-only risk assessment done for this rule is wholly 
inadequate especially in light of the decades of lead and arsenic emissions that have already 
emanated from these two sources. 
To satisfy Clean Air Act § 112(f)(2), EPA must determine whether “standards 
promulgated pursuant to subsection (d) and applicable to a category or subcategory of 
sources emitting a pollutant (or pollutants) classified as a known, probable or possible 
human carcinogen do not reduce lifetime excess cancer risks to the individual most 
exposed to emissions from a source in the category or subcategory to less than one in one 
million.”114 In addition, EPA must “promulgate standards for such category or subcategory 
if promulgation of such standards is required in order to provide an ample margin of safety 
to protect public health in accordance with this section (as in effect before November 15, 
1990) or to prevent, taking into consideration costs, energy, safety, and other relevant 
factors, an adverse environmental effect. Emission standards promulgated under this 
subsection shall provide an ample margin of safety to protect public health in accordance 
with this section (as in effect before November 15, 1990), unless the Administrator 
determines that a more stringent standard is necessary to prevent, taking into consideration 
costs, energy, safety, and other relevant factors, an adverse environmental effect.”115 
EPA cannot possibly satisfy these requirements where, as here, it makes a blanket 
assumption that health risks are acceptable so long as concentrations of lead in the ambient 
air are below the lead NAAQS. Specifically, EPA cannot possibly show that the health 
risks (including the risk of cancer) are acceptable in a community where lead has been 
deposited for more than a century, based solely on the lead levels in the air. Exposures to 
any new emissions of lead at all add to people’s exposures to lead that has accumulated 
from previous years’ emissions. Concentrations of accumulated lead in the soil alone may 
make health risks unacceptable and may mean that ambient concentrations of lead below 
the lead NAAQS are necessary for risks to be acceptable. EPA’s approach to lead risks 
unlawfully rewrites § 112(f)(2) to allow EPA to determine whether lead levels in the air are 
below the lead NAAQS rather than ensuring that risks – including risks from exposure to 
lead – are acceptable. 
Historic lead deposition from these smelters is the gift that keeps on giving because 
 
112 https://www.epa.gov/superfund/lead-superfund-sites-software-and-users-manuals 
113 https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6996839/ 
114 42 U.S.C. § 7412(f)(2). 
115 Id. 

25 
 
once deposited, the lead stays in the environment and keeps being re-entrained in the 
environment-including the air.  At other former lead sources, historic lead deposition is a 
widespread source of lead in the soils, the water, and the air (through re-suspension). 
Lead deposition map from Frisco, Texas. 116 
 
116 It should be noted that the Asarco and Freeport Smelters would emit about this amount 
of lead in less than a decade, at their current emissions rates. Those rates will undoubtedly 
rise as more and more copper is smelted for the Clean Energy economy. 

26 
 
Lead deposition map from Exide Lead Smelter in Boyle Heights, CA 117 
 
EPA seems to be systematically ignoring the impact which re-suspension of 
entrained metals have on their risk findings and contributes to continuing adverse effects on 
environmental justice communities and subsistence fisher people. A recent paper called 
EPA out on this exact same shortcoming with their estimates on mercury emissions from 
coal fired power plants. 
“Deposition from legacy mercury: EPA did not consider the long lifetime of utility- 
derived mercury in the environment. After mercury from coal-fired EGUs is deposited to 
ecosystems, some is reemitted and continues to cycle in the global environment where it 
can accumulate in the commercial seafood that people eat. In our analysis, we estimate the 
global legacy of cumulative U.S. utility-derived mercury emissions from Streets et al. 
(2019) using a global biogeochemical box model (Amos et al., 2013, 2014). We used the 
model to quantify the contribution to global deposition from cumulative U.S. EGU 
emissions in 2010 (1.0%) and 2020 (0.89%) that is still actively cycling in the biosphere 
 
117 This area is roughly 10 square miles and much of the contamination out of the range of 
the picture has yet to be characterized. 

27 
 
and thus contributes to background deposition from all sources. This contribution to 
background deposition is an important contributor to mercury exposures from global ocean 
seafood harvests (Figure 3).”118 
Ironically, USEPA has known about the substantial contribution of the re-
suspension of lead from copper smelters for decades.119 For example, in 1998, USEPA 
published an extensive report on lead emissions from a number of source categories, 
including copper smelters.  They specifically included estimates (based on lead monitoring) 
from resuspension of lead from roadways near major lead sources.120 
To the extent EPA claims to know that just because lead levels are below the lead 
NAAQS, people living on the San Carlos Apache Reservation, in Hayden, Winkleman, or 
in Miami have acceptable health risks and are protected by an ample margin of safety, its 
claim is arbitrary. Because EPA does not and cannot claim to know how much lead people 
in these communities are exposed to, it cannot rationally claim that their risks are 
acceptable and that they are protected with an ample margin of safety by its copper smelter 
standards. Nor can EPA claim that its standards suffice to prevent adverse environmental 
effects in an environment that has already been contaminated by lead emissions from 
copper smelters for more than a century. 
 
EPA further claims: 
 
the primary lead NAAQS is a reasonable measure of determining risk acceptability 
(i.e., the first step of the Benzene NESHAP analysis) since it is designed to protect the 
 
118 https://cdn1.sph.harvard.edu/wp-
content/uploads/sites/2343/2022/04/MATSTemplateAnalysis_041122c.pdf 
119 Marinshaw, R. and D. Wallace (MRI). Estimating and Controlling Fugitive Lead 
Emissions from Industrial Sources. Research Triangle Park, North Carolina: U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards, 1990. 
120 EPA, Locating and Estimating Air Emissions from Sources of Lead and Lead 
Compounds (May 1998), https://www3.epa.gov/ttnchie1/le/lead.pdf, at 4-23 – 4-27, 7-9 – 
7-10.  

28 
 
most susceptible group in the human population – children, including children living 
near major lead emitting sources. 73 FR 67002/3; 73 FR 67000/3; 73 FR 67005/1. In 
addition, applying the level of the primary lead NAAQS at the risk acceptability step is 
conservative, since that primary lead NAAQS reflects an adequate margin of safety.”121 
 
That argument lacks merit for several two reasons. First, contrary to EPA’s claim, the lead 
NAAQS is not designed to protect people exposed to emissions from a category of major 
sources of hazardous air pollutants from all risks of lead exposure, but only from the risks 
of inhalation exposure to lead. 
 
Second, EPA’s belief that applying the lead NAAQS at the acceptability step does 
not make the agency’s use of the lead NAAQS in place of an actual determination of the 
risks actually are for people exposed to lead emissions from copper smelters any less 
unlawful or arbitrary. As the D.C. Circuit has explained in the closely analogous context of 
§ 112(d)(4), EPA cannot avoid meeting specific statutory requirements for health-based 
decision-making merely by stating its approach is “conservative.”122 
 
 Third, the Children’s Health Protection Advisory Committee has advised EPA that 
it should strengthen the Lead NAAQS by an order of magnitude (to 0.02 μg/m3 or below, 
require better monitoring, and base the measurements on a one-month period) because it 
“is insufficient to protect children’s health.”123 The NAAQS in place now only seeks to 
avoid an air-related population mean IQ loss in excess of 2 points – recognizing that on 
average that, or in some communities even higher neurological harm is occurring under the 
2008 Lead NAAQS.124 There can be no doubt that risks and likely harm occur below the 
level of the 2008 NAAQS.  
D. EPA Correctly Finds that Risks from Copper Smelters Are Unacceptable. 
For several reasons, EPA correctly proposes to find that the health risks from 
copper smelters is unacceptable.125 EPA finds that, for the individual most exposed to 
allowable emissions from copper smelters, the inhalation cancer risk alone is 90-in-one-
million.126 
Further, ambient lead concentrations exceed the lead NAAQS, using both EPA’s 
“allowable” and so-called “actual” lead emissions estimates. “Lead concentrations above 
the NAAQS increase the risk of developmental effects for children.”127 Although lead 
levels below the NAAQS do not mean that risk levels are acceptable, risk levels above the 
NAAQS are plainly unacceptable. In addition, copper smelter pollutants other than lead, 
 
121 Id. at 8 n.2. 
122 Sierra Club v. EPA, 895 F.3d 1, 12-13 (D.C. Cir. 2018). 
123 Letter from Sheela Sathyanarayana, CHPAC to Gina McCarthy, EPA (Jan. 8, 2015) 
(CHPAC 2015 Letter‖), available at https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-
01/documents/naaqs_for_lead_letter.pdf.   
124 73 Fed. Reg. at 67,006 
125 87 Fed. Reg. at 1642-1643. 
126 Id. at 1642. 
127 Id. 

29 
 
such as arsenic, also have developmental effects.128 Although EPA did not attempt to 
calculate the total non-cancer inhalation risks that these other pollutants create, they make 
the already-unacceptable risks from lead even more unacceptable. Notably, arsenic is an 
even worse risk driver than lead, and EPA’s assumption that arsenic is emitted at a 
relatively low level compared to lead results in an understatement of arsenic emissions and 
risks.129 
EPA found that, because of copper smelters’ arsenic emissions, acute inhalation 
risks have a non-cancer “hazard quotient” (HQ) of 7.130 EPA states that any HQ level equal 
to or greater than 1 is likely to cause adverse health effects131 and that these elevated acute 
risk levels “indicate there are significant risks of noncancer health effects for people near 
the facility.”132  
Finally, without even considering the carcinogenic effects of exposures to lead 
through pathways other than air, EPA concluded that multipathway cancer risks are 
extremely high, 1000-in-one-million.133 The agency states that more than 29,000 people 
have elevated cancer risks as a result of exposure to the copper smelters’ toxic emissions 
and that more than a quarter of these people are Native American.134 Allowing this 
environmental injustice to continue could scarcely be more at odds with the Biden 
Administration’s stated commitment to environmental justice. 
E. EPA’s Proposed Rule Does Not Reduce Risk To Acceptable Levels. 
EPA’s proposed response to finding that copper smelters present extraordinarily 
high levels of cancer risk and non-cancer risk to people in nearby communities and that 
they are an appalling example of environmental injustice is to require minor reductions in 
copper smelters’ toxic reductions. Specifically, EPA proposes new standards that will – by 
EPA’s estimates – reduce copper smelters’ total hazardous air pollutant emissions of 
approximately 21 tpy by about 4 tpy, or about 20 percent.  
EPA claims these reductions will bring the inhalation cancer risk from 80-in-one-
million to 30-in-one-million. EPA further claims they will bring lead concentrations below 
the lead NAAQS and reduce the HQ for acute exposures from 7 to 2. EPA’s claim that its 
minor proposed reductions in copper smelters’ toxics emissions will make the risks 
acceptable is arbitrary and the agency’s failure to issue standards that will actually assure 
that risks from this category acceptable would be unlawful. 
First, although EPA claims that its proposed standards will reduce inhalation cancer 
risk by only about 21 percent, it also claims they will reduce the risk from 80-in-one-
million to 30-in-one-million – a 62.5 percent reduction. EPA does not explain this apparent 
 
128 Id. 
129 See European Environment Agency Report on Copper Production (2019), Ex. B. hereto, 
at 10-11. 
130 Id. 
131 RRA at 35-36. 
132 87 Fed. Reg. at 1642. 
133 Id. 
134 Id. at 1641-1642. 

30 
 
contradiction. Nor does EPA explain why it chooses to use the 80-in-one-million (based on 
so-called “actual” emissions) as a starting point for its risk reduction claims, instead of the 
90-in-one-million risk level based on allowable emissions, what the resulting cancer risk 
would be if it used 90-in-one-million as the starting point, or whether EPA regards that 
higher cancer risk as acceptable. EPA does not even say why it regards a 30-in-one-million 
cancer risk as acceptable. 
Second, EPA does not grapple with its own finding that the multi-pathway cancer 
risk is 1000-in-one-million. EPA does not say what levels the multipathway risk will be 
after the proposed standards take effect, whether it regards these levels as acceptable, or 
why it might regard them as acceptable. 
Third, as noted above, EPA did not even attempt to determine the total non-cancer 
risk, especially for children exposed to developmental toxins. Nor does EPA say what the 
total non-cancer risk will be after its proposed standards take effect. Without knowing 
either of these endpoints, EPA cannot rationally claim the resulting risk levels are 
acceptable. 
Fourth, EPA provides no explanation for its apparent belief that a HQ of 2 – twice 
the level at which adverse health effects are likely – is acceptable. 
Fifth, all of EPA’s claims that its proposed standards will yield acceptable risk 
levels are based on not only EPA’s flawed and unexplained claims about the reductions its 
rule will yield and what risk levels are acceptable but also on EPA’s unlawful and arbitrary 
assumptions about what the current emission levels and risk levels are. Because EPA’s 
estimates of current emission levels and risk levels are arbitrary and based on an unlawful 
interpretation of the Clean Air Act, its claims about the risk reductions its proposed rule 
will yield are necessarily arbitrary and based on an unlawful interpretation of the Clean Air 
Act as well. 
F. EPA’s Proposed Rule Does Not Provide an Ample Margin of Safety To 
Protect Public Health. 
Clean Air Act § 112(f)(2) requires EPA to assure that its standards protect public 
health with an ample margin of safety.135 
In its ample margin of safety, EPA considers and rejects a limit on emissions from 
converters that would, by the agency’s estimates, reduce emissions from the Freeport 
smelter by more than 7.6 tpy, about 95 percent.136 These reductions in themselves would be 
significant, accounting for more than one third of the category’s total hazardous air 
pollutant emissions. Added to the 4.26 tpy reductions EPA does propose, they would 
reduce the category’s total hazardous air pollutant emissions by more than 56 percent. 
The limit EPA rejects is based on the use of a wet ESP on the Freeport smelter’s 
Aisle Scrubber. This is a stack that vents several polluting processes at the Freeport 
smelter, and it is by far the single worst polluting emission point at either smelter. EPA 
 
135 42 U.S.C. § 7412(f)(2). 
136 87 Fed. Reg. at 1643. 

31 
 
rejects this limit based on its claims that estimated capital costs of a wet ESP are “relatively 
high,” that there are “uncertainties,” and that the risk reductions for people living near the 
smelters would be “moderate.”137 
EPA claims that the capital cost of a wet ESP is $50 million. It also claims the 
annualized costs would be $13 million and the “cost-effectiveness” would be $1.7 million 
per ton of metal hazardous air pollutants reduced.138 Those claims are inconsistent with – 
and far higher than – EPA’s statements elsewhere in the record regarding the capital cost of 
installing a wet ESP on Aisle Scrubber at the Freeport smelter. In its AMOS Memo, EPA 
states that the capital cost of a wet ESP is $36 million -- $14 million and 28 percent 
cheaper than EPA states in the proposed rule.139 EPA also states in the AMOS Memo that 
the annualized costs would be only $4.8 million -- $8.2 million and 63 percent cheaper.140 
Lastly, EPA states that based on the same estimated reduction the cost effectiveness would 
$632,000 per ton of metal hazardous air pollutants reduced.141 
EPA uses the same $36 million capital cost and $4.8 million annualized cost 
numbers for installation of a wet ESP in its discussion of beyond the floor standards for 
anode refining furnaces.142 There it asserts the capital cost of installing two wet ESPS 
would be $72 million and that the annualized cost would be $9.6 million.143 Both numbers 
are exactly twice the cost EPA estimates for installing a single wet ESP, $36 million in 
capital costs and $4.8 million annualized costs. 
EPA’s rejection of a limit reflecting the use of a wet ESP based on its claim that 
$50 million capital cost is “relatively high” is arbitrary given record evidence that the cost 
is far lower. EPA’s completely unexplained use of two completely different cost estimates 
for the installing the same equipment at the same plant is arbitrary in itself. Further EPA 
does not even claim that the costs it provides for a wet ESP elsewhere in the record -- $36 
million in capital costs, $4.8 million in annualized costs – provide a reason to reject this 
technology, let alone explain such a claim. 
 
Even if the flaws in EPA’s claims about capital costs could be overlooked, the 
agency ignores other important cost metrics that it uses elsewhere in the record. EPA rests 
its decision to set beyond the floor limit for fugitive emissions from anode refining in part 
on its finding that the $2.3 million annualized cost of the limit would amount to just 0.016 
percent of the annual revenue of Freeport’s ultimate parent company.144 As noted above,   
EPA’s claim means that Freeport’s annual revenue is $14,475,000,000. If the capital cost 
of a wet ESP is just $36 million and the annualized cost is just $4.8 million as EPA finds in 
the AMOS memo and elsewhere in the proposal, the annualized cost of a wet ESP is just 
0.033 percent – i.e., approximately three one hundredths of one percent – of Freeport’s 
 
137 Id. 
138 Id. 
139 AMOS Memo at 6-7. 
140 Id. 
141 Id. 
142 87 Fed. Reg. at 1633. 
143 Id. 
144 Id. at 1635. 

32 
 
annual revenue. Even if the annualized cost of a wet ESP were $13 million as EPA 
erroneously claims in its ample margin of safety discussion, it would still amount to just 
0.09 percent of Freeport’s annual revenue. In short, Freeport can easily afford this 
technology. EPA does not explain why it ignores this point – which it acknowledges to be 
significant elsewhere – in its ample margin of safety analysis. 
 
EPA also ignores that the cost per ton of hazardous air pollutant reductions that 
would result from installing a wet ESP on the Aisle scrubber are well within the cost per 
ton numbers EPA has found acceptable else. As noted above, the AMOS Memo shows that 
the actual cost per ton would be $632,000, not $1.7 million as EPA claims in its 
proposal.145 EPA has previously found that a cost per ton of $1.3 million (in 2009 dollars) 
is acceptable for metal hazardous air pollutants (mostly lead, just as here).146 Nowhere 
does EPA explain why a far better cost per ton for the same hazardous air pollutants is not 
acceptable here or why this better cost per ton does not weigh in favor of setting standards 
based on the reductions that a wet ESP will achieve. 
 
Moreover, the cost per ton of installing a wet ESP is, in all likelihood, far better 
than $632,000. As EPA found elsewhere in the record, both the Freeport and Asarco 
smelters already “have many combined gas streams that vent to a common control system 
and/or stack” and that “at Asarco, the exhaust gases from the dryers, smelting furnace, 
converters, anode furnaces and acid plant are all ultimately vented to the main stack.”147 If 
a wet ESP is installed on a combined gas stream it will achieve even more reductions, 
bringing the cost per ton even further below the $1.3 million/ton EPA has found 
acceptable. 
Although the arbitrariness of EPA’s cost arguments is reason enough for the agency 
to redo it determination, EPA’s claims about risk are arbitrary as well. EPA states that lead 
concentrations would be reduced by approximately 67 percent, but cancer risk would be 
reduced by 34 percent.148 EPA does not explain or provide any record basis for the notion 
that the reductions in emissions and risk would be so disproportionate. Further, even 
accepting arguendo EPA’s claims about the extent of the risk reduction, EPA does not say 
why it does not view this risk reduction as worth achieving. 
Moreover, as noted above, EPA’s entire risk analysis is undermined by its failure to 
consider the full range and extent of people’s exposure to lead and other toxics emitted by 
copper smelters. For people who already have very high levels of exposure to lead 
emissions that have accumulated in water and soil for more than a century, any further 
reduction in lead may make the difference between suffering serious adverse health 
impacts or remaining healthy. Having failed to consider or assess the risks such people 
face, EPA cannot rationally claim these reductions are not worthwhile. 
Nor can EPA rely on its professed “uncertainty.” EPA’s RTR for copper smelters 
was due no later than 2010. It is now twelve years overdue, and EPA has had 12 years to 
 
145 Compare AMOS Memo at 6-7 with 87 Fed. Reg. at 1643. 
146 87 Fed. Reg. at 1635. 
147 RRA, Appendix 1 at A-3. 
148 Id. at 1643. 

33 
 
assess the risks and address any uncertainties. It is EPA’s job to gather the data it needs to 
make informed decisions and fully satisfy its statutory obligations.149 
G. EPA’s Proposed Rule Does Not Prevent Adverse Environmental Effects. 
EPA dismisses its statutory obligation to ensure that its standards prevent adverse 
environmental effects in one sentence: “Based on the results of the environmental risk 
screening analysis, the Agency does not expect an adverse environmental effect as a result 
of HAP emissions from this source category.” 
Copper smelters are pumping persistent and bioaccumulative hazardous air 
pollutants, including lead and arsenic, into an environment that they have already 
contaminated for more than a century. If the past century’s yearly emissions are anything 
like those estimated by EPA (let alone those reported to TRI by the companies) thousands 
of tons of lead and arsenic and other persistent pollutants have accumulated near the 
smelters and, in particular, on the San Carlos Apache Reservation. Each year’s emissions 
add to and exacerbate this contamination. The notion that emissions from the smelters do 
not cause any adverse environmental effect is risible, and EPA’s claim that it does not need 
to even consider the effects of the continued accumulation of toxic metals on the 
Reservation and other areas near the smelters contravenes the statutory requirement to 
consider all environmental effects from these air emissions and is arbitrary. 
CONCLUSION 
EPA must issue a new proposal, free from the defects above, that requires the 
maximum achievable degree of reduction in all the hazardous air pollutants that copper 
smelters emit, protects public health with an ample margin of safety, and prevents adverse 
environmental effects.    
 
 
 
149 U.S. Sugar, 830 F.3d at 644. 

 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit A 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

TRI On‐site and Off‐site Reported Disposed of or Otherwise Released (in pounds), Trend Report for 
facilities in Asarco Llc Ray Complex/ Hayden Smelter & Concentrator (TRI ID 85235SRCNC64ASA)  for 
Lead compounds chemical,  U.S.  1988‐1997
Row #
Year
On‐site
On‐site
On‐site
Fugitive Air
Stack Air
Total Air
Emissions
1
1988
22,000.00
140,000.00
162,000.00
2
1989
37,000.00
41,000.00
78,000.00
3
1990
3,965.00
61,346.00
65,311.00
4
1991
8,231.00
38,265.00
46,496.00
5
1992
9,704.00
12,314.00
22,018.00
6
1993
9,005.00
11,466.00
20,471.00
7
1994
10,368.00
13,646.00
24,014.00
8
1995
10,171.00
14,144.00
24,315.00
9
1996
10,887.00
13,726.00
24,613.00
10
1997
10,655.00
13,262.00
23,917.00
TRI On‐site and Off‐site Reported Disposed of or Otherwise Released (in pounds), Trend Report for 
facilities in Asarco Llc Ray Complex/ Hayden Smelter & Concentrator (TRI ID 85235SRCNC64ASA)  for Lead 
compounds chemical,  U.S.  1998‐2000
Row #
Year
On‐site
On‐site
On‐site
Fugitive Air
Stack Air
Total Air
Emissions
1
1998
8,265.00
3,876.00
12,141.00
2
1999
8,321.00
4,365.00
12,686.00
3
2000
7,143.00
4,161.00
11,304.00
TRI On‐site and Off‐site Reported Disposed of or Otherwise Released (in pounds), Trend Report for 
facilities in Asarco Llc Ray Complex/ Hayden Smelter & Concentrator (TRI ID 85235SRCNC64ASA)  for Lead 
compounds chemical,  U.S.  2001‐2019
Row #
Year
On‐site
On‐site
On‐site
Fugitive Air
Stack Air
Total Air
Emissions
1
2001
7,524.00
5,178.00
12,702.00
2
2002
7,617.00
1,124.00
8,741.00
3
2003
6,419.00
2,131.00
8,550.00
4
2004
2,909.00
102
3,011.00
5
2005
1,787.00
758
2,545.00
6
2006
3,749.00
874
4,623.00
7
2007
6,764.00
908
7,672.00
8
2008
9,243.00
465
9,708.00
9
2009
5,960.00
1,292.00
7,252.00
10
2010
6,004.00
1,672.00
7,676.00
11
2011
5,229.00
2,515.00
7,744.00
12
2012
3,915.00
2,188.00
6,103.00
13
2013
1,943.00
797
2,740.00
14
2014
2,284.00
1,325.00
3,609.00
15
2015
2,631.00
3,284.00
5,915.00
16
2016
3,319.00
2,180.00
5,499.00

17
2017
5,567.00
2,537.00
8,104.00
18
2018
2,679.00
985
3,664.00
19
2019
1,991.00
285
2,276.00
Reporting year (RY) 2020 is the most recent TRI data year available. Facilities reporting to TRI were 
required to submit their data to EPA by July 1 for the previous calendar year's activities. TRI Explorer is 
using the National Analysis data set (released to the public in released October 2021). This dataset 
includes revisions for the years 1988 to 2020 processed by EPA. Revisions submitted to EPA after this time 
are not reflected in TRI Explorer reports.
Users of TRI information should be aware that TRI data reflect releases and other waste management 
activities of chemicals, not whether (or to what degree) the public has been exposed to those chemicals.
 Release estimates alone are not sufficient to determine exposure or to calculate potential adverse effects 
on human health and the environment. TRI data, in conjunction with other information, can be used as a 
starting point in evaluating exposures that may result from releases and other waste management 
activities which involve toxic chemicals. The determination of potential risk depends upon many factors, 
including the toxicity of the chemical, the fate of the chemical, and the amount and duration of human or 
other exposure to the chemical after it is released.
Off‐site disposal or other releases show only net off‐site disposal or other releases, that is, off‐site 
disposal or other releases transferred to other TRI facilities reporting such transfers as on‐site disposal or 
other releases are not included to avoid double counting.
Off‐site disposal or other releases show only net off‐site disposal or other releases, that is, off‐site 
disposal or other releases transferred to other TRI facilities reporting such transfers as on‐site disposal or 
other releases are not included to avoid double counting.
On‐site Disposal or Other Releases include Underground Injection to Class I Wells (Section 5.4.1), RCRA 
Subtitle C Landfills (5.5.1A), Other Landfills (5.5.1B), Fugitive or Non‐point Air Emissions (5.1), Stack or 
Point Air Emissions (5.2), Surface Water Discharges (5.3), Underground Injection to Class II‐V Wells (5.4.2), 
Land Treatment/Application Farming (5.5.2), RCRA Subtitle C Surface Impoundments (5.5.3A), Other 
Surface Impoundments (5.5.3B), and Other Land Disposal (5.5.4). Off‐site Disposal or Other Releases 
include from Section 6.2 Class I Underground Injection Wells (M81), Class II‐V Underground Injection Wells 
(M82, M71), RCRA Subtitle C Landfills (M65), Other Landfills (M64, M72), Storage Only (M10), Solidification
/Stabilization ‐ Metals and Metal Category Compounds only (M41 or M40), Wastewater Treatment 
(excluding POTWs) ‐ Metals and Metal Category Compounds only (M62 or M61), RCRA Subtitle C Surface 
Impoundments (M66), Other Surface Impoundments (M67, M63), Land Treatment (M73), Other Land
 Disposal (M79), Other Off‐site Management (M90), Transfers to Waste Broker ‐ Disposal (M94, M91), and
 Unknown (M99) and, from Section 6.1 Transfers to POTWs (metals and metal category compounds only).
For purposes of analysis, data reported as Range Code A is calculated using a value of 5 pounds, Range 
Code B is calculated using a value of 250 pounds and Range Code C is calculated using a value of 750
 pounds.
A decimal point, or . denotes the following: if NA is reported across an entire row, the facility submitted a 
Form A (i.e., the facility certified that its total annual reportable amount is less than 500 pounds, and does
 not manufacture, process, or otherwise use more than 1 million pounds); or if a decimal point is reported
 in a single column, the facility left that particular cell blank in its Form R submission (a zero in a cell 
denotes either that the facility reported 0 or NA in its Form R submission). A decimal point is reported in 
the following columns because the element was not required to be reported for that year (the Form R has 
been changed over the years to require more detailed reporting for some media): Underground Injection 
Class I, Underground Injection Class II‐V, RCRA Subtitle C Landfills and Other Landfills for the years 1988 to 
1995; Off‐Site Disposal ‐ RCRA Subtitle C Landfills, Off‐Site Disposal ‐ Other Landfills and Off‐Site Disposal ‐ 
Surface Impoundments for the years 1988 to 2001; Other RCRA Subtitle C Surface Impoundments, Other 

Surface Impoundments, Off‐Site Underground Injection Class I Wells, Off‐Site Underground Injection Class 
II‐V Wells, Off‐Site Disposal ‐ RCRA Subtitle C Surface Impoundments and Off‐Site Disposal ‐ Other Surface 
Impoundments for the years 1988 to 2002.
<u>How to cite TRI Explorer.</u>    Following APA Style, 6th edition, an appropriate citation to TRI Explorer
 is:<br/>United States Environmental Protection Agency. (2022). <i>TRI Explorer</i> (2020 National 
Analysis Dataset (October 2021, released October 2021)) [Internet database]. Retrieved from <a 
href=https://enviro.epa.gov/triexplorer/tri_release.chemical>https://enviro.epa.gov/triexplorer/</a>,
 (March    29, 2022).

TRI On‐site and Off‐site Reported Disposed of or Otherwise Released (in pounds), Trend Report for
 facilities in Freeport‐Mcmoran Miami Inc (TRI ID 85532NSPRTPOBOX)  for Lead compounds chemical, 
 U.S.  1998‐2000
Row #
Year
On‐site
On‐site
On‐site
Fugitive Air
Stack Air
Total Air
Emissions
1
1998
3,700.00
2,900.00
6,600.00
2
1999
5,700.00
7,200.00
12,900.00
3
2000
4,700.00
6,500.00
11,200.00
TRI On‐site and Off‐site Reported Disposed of or Otherwise Released (in pounds), Trend Report for 
facilities in Freeport‐Mcmoran Miami Inc (TRI ID 85532NSPRTPOBOX)  for Lead compounds chemical,  
U.S.  2001‐2020
Row #
Year
On‐site
On‐site
On‐site
Fugitive Air
Stack Air
Total Air
Emissions
1
2001
7,000.00
4,800.00
11,800.00
2
2002
7,600.00
18,000.00
25,600.00
3
2003
7,259.00
11,108.00
18,367.00
4
2004
7,113.00
1,334.00
8,447.00
5
2005
7,311.00
1,048.00
8,359.00
6
2006
7,200.00
700
7,900.00
7
2007
7,600.00
730
8,330.00
8
2008
7,420.00
2,370.00
9,790.00
9
2009
6,704.00
987
7,691.00
10
2010
7,190.00
2,570.00
9,760.00
11
2011
6,980.00
3,150.00
10,130.00
12
2012
7,060.00
2,370.00
9,430.00
13
2013
7,080.00
2,220.00
9,300.00
14
2014
6,590.00
3,290.00
9,880.00
15
2015
7,450.00
1,720.00
9,170.00
16
2016
7,070.00
1,610.00
8,680.00
17
2017
6,120.00
922
7,042.00
18
2018
40,000.00
18,200.00
58,200.00
19
2019
25,300.00
16,700.00
42,000.00
20
2020
13,900.00
15,000.00
28,900.00
Reporting year (RY) 2020 is the most recent TRI data year available. Facilities reporting to TRI were 
required to submit their data to EPA by July 1 for the previous calendar year's activities. TRI Explorer is
 using the National Analysis data set (released to the public in released October 2021). This dataset 
includes revisions for the years 1988 to 2020 processed by EPA. Revisions submitted to EPA after this 
time are not reflected in TRI Explorer reports.
Users of TRI information should be aware that TRI data reflect releases and other waste management
activities of chemicals, not whether (or to what degree) the public has been exposed to those 
chemicals. Release estimates alone are not sufficient to determine exposure or to calculate potential 
adverse effects on human health and the environment. TRI data, in conjunction with other 
information, can be used as a starting point in evaluating exposures that may result from releases and 
other waste management activities which involve toxic chemicals. The determination of potential risk 
depends upon many factors, including the toxicity of the chemical, the fate of the chemical, and the 

amount and duration of human or other exposure to the chemical after it is released.
Off‐site disposal or other releases show only net off‐site disposal or other releases, that is, off‐site 
disposal or other releases transferred to other TRI facilities reporting such transfers as on‐site disposal
 or other releases are not included to avoid double counting.
On‐site Disposal or Other Releases include Underground Injection to Class I Wells (Section 5.4.1), RCRA 
Subtitle C Landfills (5.5.1A), Other Landfills (5.5.1B), Fugitive or Non‐point Air Emissions (5.1), Stack or
 Point Air Emissions (5.2), Surface Water Discharges (5.3), Underground Injection to Class II‐V Wells
 (5.4.2), Land Treatment/Application Farming (5.5.2), RCRA Subtitle C Surface Impoundments (5.5.3A), 
Other Surface Impoundments (5.5.3B), and Other Land Disposal (5.5.4). Off‐site Disposal or Other 
Releases include from Section 6.2 Class I Underground Injection Wells (M81), Class II‐V Underground 
Injection Wells (M82, M71), RCRA Subtitle C Landfills (M65), Other Landfills (M64, M72), Storage Only
 (M10), Solidification/Stabilization ‐ Metals and Metal Category Compounds only (M41 or M40), 
Wastewater Treatment (excluding POTWs) ‐ Metals and Metal Category Compounds only (M62 
or M61), RCRA Subtitle C Surface Impoundments (M66), Other Surface Impoundments (M67, M63), 
Land Treatment (M73), Other Land Disposal (M79), Other Off‐site Management (M90), Transfers to 
Waste Broker ‐ Disposal (M94, M91), and Unknown (M99) and, from Section 6.1 Transfers to POTWs
 (metals and metal category compounds only).
For purposes of analysis, data reported as Range Code A is calculated using a value of 5 pounds, Range 
Code B is calculated using a value of 250 pounds and Range Code C is calculated using a value of 750
 pounds.
A decimal point, or . denotes the following: if NA is reported across an entire row, the facility 
submitted a Form A (i.e., the facility certified that its total annual reportable amount is less than 500 
pounds, and does not manufacture, process, or otherwise use more than 1 million pounds); or if a 
decimal point is reported in a single column, the facility left that particular cell blank in its Form R 
submission (a zero in a cell denotes either that the facility reported 0 or NA in its Form R submission).
A decimal point is reported in the following columns because the element was not required to be 
reported for that year (the Form R has been changed over the years to require more detailed reporting 
for some media): Underground Injection Class I, Underground Injection Class II‐V, RCRA Subtitle C 
Landfills and Other Landfills for the years 1988 to 1995; Off‐Site Disposal ‐ RCRA Subtitle C Landfills, 
Off‐Site Disposal ‐ Other Landfills and Off‐Site Disposal ‐ Surface Impoundments for the years 1988 to 
2001; Other RCRA Subtitle C Surface Impoundments, Other Surface Impoundments, Off‐Site 
Underground Injection Class I Wells, Off‐Site Underground Injection Class II‐V Wells, Off‐Site Disposal ‐
RCRA Subtitle C Surface Impoundments and Off‐Site Disposal ‐ Other Surface Impoundments for the 
years 1988 to 2002.
<u>How to cite TRI Explorer.</u>  Following APA Style, 6th edition, an appropriate citation to TRI 
Explorer is:<br/>United States Environmental Protection Agency. (2022). <i>TRI Explorer</i> (2020 
National Analysis Dataset (October 2021, released October 2021)) [Internet database]. Retrieved from 
<a href=https://enviro.epa.gov/triexplorer/tri_release.chemical>https://enviro.epa.gov/triexplorer/
</a>, (February 16, 2022).

TRI On‐site and Off‐site Reported Disposed of or Otherwise Released (in pounds), top 100  facilities 
(of 3828) for facilities in All Industries, for Lead compounds chemical, U.S., 2018
Row #
Facility
Fugitive Air
Point Source
 
 
Emissions
Air Emissions
1 FREEPORT‐MCMORAN MIAMI INC.5701 NEW ST, CL
40,000.00
18,200.00
2 RED DOG OPERATIONS.90 MILES N OF KOTZEBUE, K
18,057.00
150.03
3 US ARMY FORT CAMPBELL.IMCB PWE BLDG 5134 2N
10,503.00
0
4 FIORE GOLD PAN MINE.8989 WEST HIGHWAY 50, EL
5,500.00
0.2
5 US ARMY MCALESTER ARMY AMMUNITION PLANT.1
4,940.00
0
6 KENNECOTT UTAH COPPER SMELTER & REFINERY.12
4,124.00
10,931.00
7 MAX ENVIRONMENTAL ‐‐ YUKON FACILITY.233 MAX
2,945.00
0
8 ASARCO LLC RAY COMPLEX/ HAYDEN SMELTER & CO
2,679.00
985
9 BUICK MINE/MILL.270 FOREST ROAD 2231, BOSS M
2,365.00
500
10 US NAVY NSWC CRANE DIV INSTALLATION ACTIVITY
2,228.84
0
11 US ARMY 1ST ARMORED DIV & FORT BLISS RANGES.
2,066.00
0
12 U.S. ARMY FORT BRAGG.DPW ENV COMPLIANCE BR
1,855.50
8.3
13 MONTANA RESOURCES LLP.600 SHIELDS AVE, BUTTE
1,801.75
151.24
14 US ARMY RADFORD ARMY AMMUNITION PLANT.RT 
1,562.00
83
15 US ARMY AVIATION CENTER OF EXCELLENCE & FT RU
1,450.30
0
16 U.S. MARINE CORPS TWENTYNINE PALMS AIR GROU
1,444.70
0.5
17 U.S. ARMY SCHOFIELD BARRACKS ‐ RANGE FACILITY.
1,317.90
0.1
18 US ARMY FORT HOOD RANGE FACILITY.4622 ENGINE
1,250.00
0
19 US ARMY BLUE GRASS ARMY DEPOT.431 BATTLEFIEL
1,173.00
0
20 U.S. ARMY ‐ FORT SILL, OK (RANGE FACILITY).2515 R
1,057.00
0
21 COEUR ROCHESTER INC.HWY I‐80 EXT 119 23 MILES
1,049.20
4.4
22 CRIPPLE CREEK & VICTOR GOLD MINING CO.1280 HW
922.2
0
23 CMC STEEL TENNESSEE.1919 TENNESSEE AVE, KNOX
874.83
221.21
24 FLETCHER MINE/MILL.230 COUNTY ROAD 849, CENT
821
42
25 PINTO VALLEY MINE.2911 N FOREST SERVICE RD 28
811.448
2.25016
26 KENNECOTT UTAH COPPER MINE CONCENTRATORS 
810.27
2
27 US PIPE & FOUNDRY CO LLC.2023 ST LOUIS AVE, BES
772
21
28 US ARMY HAWTHORNE ARMY DEPOT MAIN BASE.1 
741
0
29 US ARMY FORT STEWART (PART).1550 VETERANS PA
697
0
30 U.S. DOD USAF EGLIN AFB FL.700 RANGE RD BLDG 5
694.8
0
31 NUCOR STEEL BIRMINGHAM INC.2301 F L SHUTTLES
681.71
150.13
32 CLEVELAND‐CLIFFS STEEL LLC.3001 DICKEY RD, EAST
652.46
106.89
33 SWEETWATER MINE/MILL.1382 SWEETWATER MINE
641
27
34 YAKIMA TRAINING CENTER‐ RANGE.970 FIRING CEN
638
0
35 BRUSHY CREEK MINE/MILL.10627 HIGHWAY KK, BOS
630
47
36 FORT WAINWRIGHT MAIN CANTONMENT.FT WAINW
627.8
3.01
37 U.S. ARMY MANEUVER CENTER OF EXCELLENCE.DEP
580.9
0
38 NEVADA GOLD MINES LLC ‐ PHOENIX MINE.12 MI SE
573.1
0.2
39 TEXTRON AVIATION/EAST CAMPUS.9709 E CENTRAL
571
0.25
40 ALLEGANY BALLISTICS LAB (NIROP).210 WV STATE R
558
1
41 US ARMY FORT DRUM.10000 10TH MOUNTAIN DIV 
553.7
0
42 USS GARY WORKS.1 N BROADWAY, GARY INDIANA 4
546.73
446.71
43 AMG VANADIUM LLC.60790 SOUTHGATE RD, CAMB
543.91
99.8

44 US MARINE CORPS MCB CAMP PENDLETON.BLDG 22
524.2
0.2
45 NUCOR STEEL HERTFORD COUNTY.1505 RIVER RD, C
520.54
19.1
46 REPUBLIC STEEL‐CANTON PLANT.2633 EIGHTH ST NE
508
289
47 ARMY NATIONAL GUARD ORCHARD COMBAT TRAIN
478
0
48 EXXONMOBIL BATON ROUGE CHEMICAL PLANT (PAR
475.1
237.9
49 U.S. MARINE CORPS CHOCOLATE MOUNTAINS AERIA
451.2
0
50 US ARMY FORT CARSON (CANTONMENT).1626 EVAN
450.9
0
51 STRYTEN MANCHESTER LLC.913 S 10TH ST, MANCHE
440
170
52 U S ARMY JRTC & FORT POLK.6661 WARRIOR TRAIL 
431.8
0
53 NEWMONT GOLDCORP TWIN CREEKS MINE.35 MILE
426.8
1.4
54 US ARMY FORT IRWIN NATIONAL TRAINING CENTER
426
0
55 CLEVELAND‐CLIFFS CLEVELAND WORKS LLC.3060 EG
421
241
56 MCIEAST‐MCB CAMLEJ MAIN FACILITY.12 POST LN, 
404.0488
6.44
57 PEND OREILLE MINE.1382 PEND OREILLE MINE RD, M
404
286
58 US ARMY GARRISON FORT KNOX.125 6TH AVE STE 3
375.026
0.8
59 ENVIROFOCUS TECHNOLOGIES.1901 N 66TH ST, TAM
360
500
60 US ARMY POHAKULOA TRAINING AREA ‐ RANGE FAC
343.5
0
61 CLEVELAND‐CLIFFS RIVERDALE LLC.13500 S PERRY A
338
85
62 US ARMY MANEUVER SUPPORT CENTER IMLD‐PW‐E
331.6
0
63 NEVADA GOLD MINES LLC‐CORTEZ DISTRICT.30 MILE
319.8
2.8
64 OPTIMUS STEEL LLC.100 OLD HWY 90 W, VIDOR TEX
318.2
81.3
65 NUCOR STEEL NEBRASKA.2911 E NUCOR RD, NORFO
314.99
129.01
66 LOCKHEED MARTIN CLEARWATER OPERATION.3655
307.32
0
67 FREEPORT‐MCMORAN MORENCI INC.4521 N US HW
287
3.1
68 US ARMY FORT AP HILL.19952 N RANGE RD, BOWLIN
284.5
0.0112
69 BUICK RESOURCE RECYCLING FACILITY LLC.18594 HW
281
3,711.00
70 AMSTED RAIL CO INC.1700 WALNUT, GRANITE CITY 
265
51
71 RSCC WIRE & CABLE LLC.20 BRADLEY PARK RD, EAST
260
0
72 US ARMY NATIONAL GUARD FORT CHAFFEE RANGES
252.9
0
73 SWVA INC.2ND AVE & 17TH ST, HUNTINGTON WEST
250
514
74 AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER KAMMER/MITCHELL P
250
75
75 NYSTAR GORDONSVILLE MINE & MILL.120 ZINC MIN
248.86
3.85
76 EVRAZ ROCKY MOUNTAIN STEEL.2100 S FWY, PUEBL
248
548
77 U.S. NAVY SAN CLEMENTE ISLAND.55 NM S OF LONG
242
0
78 USS MON VALLEY WORKS ‐ EDGAR THOMSON PLAN
231.47
206.48
79 KEYSTONE STEEL & WIRE CO D/B/A LIBERTY STEEL &
224.1
224.1
80 ASARCO LLC RAY MINE OPERATIONS.HWY 177 8 MIL
212.79
0.1553
81 US SILVER ‐ IDAHO INC.1041 LAKE GULCH RD, WALL
198.45
0
82 NUCOR STEEL ‐ A DIV OF NUCOR CORP.7825 W 2120
188.7
627.8
83 CLEVELAND‐CLIFFS BURNS HARBOR LLC.250 W US H
185.9
10,920.00
84 NEVADA GOLD MINES LLC ‐ GOLDSTRIKE MINES INC
184.3
50.1
85 U.S. ARMY JOINT BASE LEWIS‐MCCHORD.11 MILES S
180
0
86 WESTERN INDUSTRIES INC PLASTIC PRODUCTS GRO
178
0
87 ST MARYS CEMENT INC ‐ DIXON PLANT.1914 WHITE
171
2.4
88 MONARCH CEMENT CO.449 1200TH ST, HUMBOLDT
167
78
89 US ARMY NATIONAL GUARD FORT PICKETT (RANGES
163.6
0
90 US ARMY NATIONAL GUARD CAMP BLANDING RANG
163.4
0

91 US ARMY NATIONAL GUARD CAMP BOWIE RANGES.
158.5
0
92 ST LAWRENCE ZINC CO BALMAT 4 MINE & MILL.408
156
8
93 SDI LAFARGA LLC.1640 S RYAN RD, NEW HAVEN IND
154.9
153.3
94 GERDAU LONG STEEL NORTH AMERICA ‐ JACKSON M
153.74
678.01
95 CMC STEEL FLORIDA.16770 REBAR RD, JACKSONVILL
153.14
99.96
96 U.S. MARINE CORPS MCAS CHERRY PT ‐ BT11 BOMB
149.7
0.005
97 CHINO MINES CO MINE CONCENTRATOR‐SXEW PLA
149
0.3
98 FREEPORT‐MCMORAN BAGDAD INC.1 MAIN ST, BAG
146
2.5
99 OWENS‐BROCKWAY GLASS CONTAINER INC PLANT 2
141.71
59.59
100 SPRINGERVILLE GENERATING STATION.12 MILES N 1
141.2
18.3
 
Total of Top 100 facilities
140,503.93
52,269.13
 
Total disposal or other releases omitting double 
counted amounts
 
Reporting year (RY) 2020 is the most recent TRI data year available. Facilities reporting to TRI were 
required to submit their data to EPA by July 1 for the previous calendar year's activities. 
TRI Explorer is using the National Analysis data set (released to the public in released October 2021). 
This dataset includes revisions for the years 1988 to 2020 processed by EPA. Revisions submitted to EPA 
after this time are not reflected in TRI Explorer reports.
Users of TRI information should be aware that TRI data reflect releases and other waste management 
activities of chemicals, not whether (or to what degree) the public has been exposed to those chemicals. 
Release estimates alone are not sufficient to determine exposure or to calculate potential adverse
effects on human health and the environment. TRI data, in conjunction with other information, can be 
used as a starting point in evaluating exposures that may result from releases and other waste 
management activities which involve toxic chemicals. The determination of potential risk depends upon 
many factors, including the toxicity of the chemical, the fate of the chemical, and the amount and 
duration of human or other exposure to the chemical after it is released. 
This report ranks the 100 largest facilities reporting in a particular disposal or other release category 
(by default, the report ranks the top 100 facilities by total on‐ and off‐site disposal or other releases). 
By sorting on different disposal or other release categories (e.g., Class I Wells, RCRA Subtitle C Landfills, 
etc.), TRI Explorer will generate a report ranking the top 100 facilities for the specific category chosen. 
Note that the top 100 facilities ranked for a specific category will change as the category changes (i.e., 
the 100 facilities ranked for Class I Wells is not necessarily the same 100 facilities for RCRA Subtitle C
Landfills).
For purposes of analysis, data reported as Range Code A is calculated using a value of 5 pounds, Range 
Code B is calculated using a value of 250 pounds and Range Code C is calculated using a value of 750 
pounds.
The facility may have reported multiple NAICS codes to TRI in the current reporting year. See the facility
profile report by clicking on the facility name to see a list of all NAICS codes submitted to TRI for the current 
reporting year.
A decimal point, or . denotes that the facility left that particular cell blank in its Form R submission (a 
zero in a cell denotes either that the facility reported 0 or NA in its Form R submission). NA in a cell 
denotes that the facility has submitted only Form A and thus the data for release, waste transfers or 
quantities of TRI chemicals in waste are not applicable. By submitting a Form A the facility has certified
 that its total annual reportable amount is less than 500 pounds, and that the facility does not 
manufacture, process, or otherwise use more than 1 million pounds of the toxic chemical.
The user selected list of chemicals applied in this report include  Lead compounds

TRI On‐site and Off‐site Reported Disposed of or Otherwise Released (in pounds), top 100  facilities 
(of 3805) for  facilities in All Industries, for Lead compounds chemical, U.S., 2019
Row #
Facility
Fugitive Air
Point Source
 
 
Emissions
Air Emissions
1 FREEPORT‐MCMORAN MIAMI INC.5701 NEW ST, CLAYPOO
25,300.00
16,700.00
2 RED DOG OPERATIONS.90 MILES N OF KOTZEBUE, KOTZEBU
15,252.00
136.85
3 MAX ENVIRONMENTAL ‐‐ YUKON FACILITY.233 MAX LN, YU
4,838.00
0
4 KENNECOTT UTAH COPPER SMELTER & REFINERY.12000 W
4,126.00
7,149.00
5 US ARMY FORT CAMPBELL.IMCB PWE BLDG 5134 2ND ST &
3,775.00
0
6 BUICK MINE/MILL.270 FOREST ROAD 2231, BOSS MISSOUR
3,234.00
469
7 FEDERAL CARTRIDGE CO.900 EHLEN DR, ANOKA MINNESOT
3,104.13
934.95
8 US NAVY NSWC CRANE DIV INSTALLATION ACTIVITY‐INSTAL
2,400.80
0
9 ASARCO LLC RAY COMPLEX/ HAYDEN SMELTER & CONCENT
1,991.00
285
10 EXXONMOBIL BATON ROUGE CHEMICAL PLANT (PART).499
1,914.90
220.8
11 FREEPORT‐MCMORAN MORENCI INC.4521 N US HWY 191, 
1,860.00
2.8
12 NEVADA GOLD MINES LLC ‐ PHOENIX MINE.12 MI SE OF BA
1,693.00
0.4
13 US ARMY MCALESTER ARMY AMMUNITION PLANT.1 C TRE
1,606.00
0
14 US ARMY BLUE GRASS ARMY DEPOT.431 BATTLEFIELD MEM
1,575.60
0
15 MONTANA RESOURCES LLP.600 SHIELDS AVE, BUTTE MON
1,533.64
7.59
16 U.S. ARMY FORT BRAGG.DPW ENV COMPLIANCE BRANCH B
1,406.90
5.7
17 US ARMY RADFORD ARMY AMMUNITION PLANT.RT 114 RA
1,377.00
84
18 US ARMY AVIATION CENTER OF EXCELLENCE & FT RUCKER 
1,206.00
0
19 CRIPPLE CREEK & VICTOR GOLD MINING CO.1280 HWY 67, 
1,041.30
0
20 PINTO VALLEY MINE.2911 N FOREST SERVICE RD 287, MIAM
987
14
21 U.S. MARINE CORPS CHOCOLATE MOUNTAINS AERIAL GUN
983.1
0
22 U.S. ARMY ‐ FORT SILL, OK (RANGE FACILITY).2515 RINGGO
862.5
0
23 US ARMY FORT CARSON (CANTONMENT).1626 EVANS ST B
858
0
24 COEUR ROCHESTER INC.HWY I‐80 EXT 119 23 MILES NE OF 
854.1
3.1
25 US ARMY FORT STEWART (PART).1550 VETERANS PARKWA
841
0
26 FLETCHER MINE/MILL.230 COUNTY ROAD 849, CENTERVILL
828
42
27 INTERNATIONAL PAPER ORANGE MILL.1750 IP WAY, ORAN
818.6
0
28 U.S. ARMY MANEUVER CENTER OF EXCELLENCE.DEPARTME
799.1
0
29 US ARMY GARRISON FORT KNOX.125 6TH AVE STE 320 IMS
783.74
0.3
30 AMG VANADIUM LLC.60790 SOUTHGATE RD, CAMBRIDGE 
783.35
144.84
31 SWEETWATER MINE/MILL.1382 SWEETWATER MINE ROAD
755
27
32 HYCROFT MINE.54980 JUNGO ROAD, WINNEMUCCA NEVA
693.4
1.7
33 BRUSHY CREEK MINE/MILL.10627 HIGHWAY KK, BOSS MISS
684
47
34 U.S. DOD USAF EGLIN AFB FL.700 RANGE RD BLDG 592, EGL
673.8
0
35 CLEVELAND‐CLIFFS STEEL LLC.3001 DICKEY RD, EAST CHICA
659.26
109.38
36 U.S. MARINE CORPS TWENTYNINE PALMS AIR GROUND CO
658.7
1.5
37 FIORE GOLD PAN MINE.8989 WEST HIGHWAY 50, ELY NEVA
650
0.4
38 US ARMY POHAKULOA TRAINING AREA ‐ RANGE FACILITY.S
640.9
0
39 US PIPE & FOUNDRY CO LLC.2023 ST LOUIS AVE, BESSEMER
637
18.5
40 USS GARY WORKS.1 N BROADWAY, GARY INDIANA 46402 (
571.9
405.58
41 NEVADA GOLD MINES LLC ‐ TURQUOISE RIDGE.28 MILES NE
535.3
1.4
42 FORT WAINWRIGHT MAIN CANTONMENT.FT WAINWRIGHT
512
3
43 US MARINE CORPS MCB CAMP PENDLETON.BLDG 22165 11
500.6
0.2

44 CMC STEEL TENNESSEE.1919 TENNESSEE AVE, KNOXVILLE T
495.66
829.98
45 US ARMY NATIONAL GUARD CAMP SHELBY RANGES.BUILD
479
0
46 CLEVELAND‐CLIFFS CLEVELAND WORKS LLC.3060 EGGERS A
475
296
47 NEVADA GOLD MINES LLC‐CORTEZ DISTRICT.30 MILES S OF
469.7
1.6
48 US ARMY 1ST ARMORED DIV & FORT BLISS RANGES.TAYLOR
466
0
49 NUCOR STEEL NEBRASKA.2911 E NUCOR RD, NORFOLK NEB
432.82
95.18
50 US ARMY FORT IRWIN NATIONAL TRAINING CENTER.DPW E
426
0
51 TEXTRON AVIATION/EAST CAMPUS.9709 E CENTRAL AVE, W
418
0.25
52 ALLEGANY BALLISTICS LAB (NIROP).210 WV STATE RT 956, R
394
1
53 KENNECOTT UTAH COPPER MINE CONCENTRATORS & POW
389.81
0
54 DOE RUN CO HERCULANEUM SMELTER.881 MAIN ST, HERC
389.52
83.1
55 MCIEAST‐MCB CAMLEJ MAIN FACILITY.12 POST LN, CAMP L
387.0311
4.67
56 RSCC WIRE & CABLE LLC.20 BRADLEY PARK RD, EAST GRAN
370
0
57 US ARMY HAWTHORNE ARMY DEPOT NEW BOMB.HAWTH
333
0
58 AMSTED RAIL CO INC.1700 WALNUT, GRANITE CITY ILLINOI
318
61
59 US STEEL GRANITE CITY WORKS.1951 STATE ST, GRANITE C
305
462
60 WIELAND ROLLED PRODUCTS NA ‐ EAST ALTON CASTING P.
302.2
21.2
61 BUICK RESOURCE RECYCLING FACILITY LLC.18594 HWY KK, 
294
6,646.00
62 VIPER MINE.781 600TH ST, ELKHART ILLINOIS 62634 (LOGA
292
0
63 EVRAZ ROCKY MOUNTAIN STEEL.2100 S FWY, PUEBLO COL
250.7
551.6
64 AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER KAMMER/MITCHELL PLANT.R
250
67
65 SWVA INC.2ND AVE & 17TH ST, HUNTINGTON WEST VIRGIN
246
507
66 PEND OREILLE MINE.1382 PEND OREILLE MINE RD, METALI
231
265
67 USS MON VALLEY WORKS ‐ EDGAR THOMSON PLANT.BRAD
229.13
208.64
68 US ARMY FORT DRUM.10000 10TH MOUNTAIN DIV DR, FO
227.2
0
69 U.S. ARMY SCHOFIELD BARRACKS ‐ RANGE FACILITY.BEAVE
227.2
0.1
70 U S ARMY JRTC & FORT POLK.6661 WARRIOR TRAIL BLDG 3
226
0
71 NUCOR STEEL BIRMINGHAM INC.2301 F L SHUTTLESWORTH
221.12
59.65
72 US DOD USAF CANNON AFB MELROSE RANGE.3771 SUNDA
215.6
0
73 ASARCO LLC RAY MINE OPERATIONS.HWY 177 8 MILES N O
204.22
0.15
74 FEDERAL METAL CO.7250 DIVISION ST, OAKWOOD VILLAGE
196
62
75 RAWHIDE MINE.58 MILES SE OF FALLON, FALLON NEVADA 
192
0
76 NUCOR STEEL ‐ A DIV OF NUCOR CORP.7825 W 21200 N, PL
190.3
607
77 TOYOTA MOTOR MANUFACTURING INDIANA INC.4000 TUL
188
0
78 US ARMY MANEUVER SUPPORT CENTER IMLD‐PW‐E.8112 N
185.7
0
79 CLEVELAND‐CLIFFS STEEL CORP DEARBORN WORKS.4001 M
182
566
80 PRAIRIE STATE GENERATING CO.1739 NEW MARIGOLD ROA
180
87.8
81 DOD, USAF, AVON PARK AIR FORCE RANGE.29 SOUTH BLVD
179.5
0
82 KEYSTONE STEEL & WIRE CO D/B/A LIBERTY STEEL & WIRE 
175.9
175.9
83 BALD MOUNTAIN MINE.70 MILES S OF ELKO, ELKO NEVADA
173
2.3
84 GARFIELD FACILITY LLC.2601 W MOUNT PLEASANT BLVD, M
172.82
102.7
85 GERDAU LONG STEEL NORTH AMERICA ‐ JACKSON MILL.80
171.95
814.81
86 CHINO MINES CO MINE CONCENTRATOR‐SXEW PLANTS.99 
171
0.1
87 FREEPORT‐MCMORAN BAGDAD INC.1 MAIN ST, BAGDAD A
166
1.9
88 NEVADA GOLD MINES LLC ‐ CARLIN SOUTH AREA.6 MILES N
165.5
15.4
89 US DOD USAF BARRY M GOLDWATER RANGE.HWY 85 35 M
163.9
0
90 U.S. ARMY JOINT BASE LEWIS‐MCCHORD.11 MILES S OF TA
160
1.5

91 GERDAU AMERISTEEL CARTERSVILLE STEEL MILL.384 OLD G
153
770
92 SPRINGERVILLE GENERATING STATION.12 MILES N 12 MILE
141.1
17.9
93 ASWPENGG LLC.26300 MILES RD, BEDFORD OHIO 44146 (C
140.2
957.2
94 ARMY NATIONAL GUARD ORCHARD COMBAT TRAINING CE
131.7
0
95 SDI LAFARGA LLC.1640 S RYAN RD, NEW HAVEN INDIANA 4
131
129
96 BASF CORP.1729 E AVE, ERIE PENNSYLVANIA 16503 (ERIE)
131
1
97 PACIFICORP NAUGHTON PLANT.HWY 189 S OF KEMMERER
129
28
98 US DHS FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING CENTER A
127.99
0
99 CLEVELAND‐CLIFFS BURNS HARBOR LLC.250 W US HWY 12,
124.4
5,305.65
100 OWENS CORNING INSULATING SYSTEMS LLC NEWARK OH F
123
1
 
Total of Top 100 facilities
111,116.49
46,624.27
 
Total disposal or other releases omitting double counted am 
 
Reporting year (RY) 2020 is the most recent TRI data year available. Facilities reporting to TRI were 
required to submit their data to EPA by July 1 for the previous calendar year's activities. TRI Explorer is 
using the National Analysis data set (released to the public in released October 2021). This dataset 
includes revisions for the years 1988 to 2020 processed by EPA. Revisions submitted to EPA after this
time are not reflected in TRI Explorer reports.
Users of TRI information should be aware that TRI data reflect releases and other waste management 
activities of chemicals, not whether (or to what degree) the public has been exposed to those chemicals. 
Release estimates alone are not sufficient to determine exposure or to calculate potential adverse effects 
on human health and the environment. TRI data, in conjunction with other information, can be used as 
a starting point in evaluating exposures that may result from releases and other waste management 
activities which involve toxic chemicals. The determination of potential risk depends upon many factors,
including the toxicity of the chemical, the fate of the chemical, and the amount and duration of human or
other exposure to the chemical after it is released. 
This report ranks the 100 largest facilities reporting in a particular disposal or other release category (by
 default, the report ranks the top 100 facilities by total on‐ and off‐site disposal or other releases). By 
sorting on different disposal or other release categories (e.g., Class I Wells, RCRA Subtitle C Landfills, etc.),
 TRI Explorer will generate a report ranking the top 100 facilities for the specific category chosen. Note 
that the top 100 facilities ranked for a specific category will change as the category changes (i.e., the 100 
facilities ranked for Class I Wells is not necessarily the same 100 facilities for RCRA Subtitle C Landfills).
For purposes of analysis, data reported as Range Code A is calculated using a value of 5 pounds, Range
Code B is calculated using a value of 250 pounds and Range Code C is calculated using a value of 750 
pounds.
The facility may have reported multiple NAICS codes to TRI in the current reporting year. See the facility 
profile report by clicking on the facility name to see a list of all NAICS codes submitted to TRI for the 
current reporting year.
A decimal point, or . denotes that the facility left that particular cell blank in its Form R submission (a 
zero in a cell denotes either that the facility reported 0 or NA in its Form R submission). NA in a cell 
denotes that the facility has submitted only Form A and thus the data for release, waste transfers or 
quantities of TRI chemicals in waste are not applicable. By submitting a Form A the facility has certified 
that its total annual reportable amount is less than 500 pounds, and that the facility does not 
manufacture, process, or otherwise use more than 1 million pounds of the toxic chemical.
The user selected list of chemicals applied in this report includes:
Lead compounds

TRI On‐site and Off‐site Reported Disposed of or Otherwise Released (in pounds), top 100  facilities (of 
3653) for  facilities in All Industries, for Lead compounds chemical, U.S., 2020
Row #
Facility
Fugitive Air
Point Source
 
 
Emissions
Air Emissions
1 FREEPORT‐MCMORAN MIAMI INC.5701 NEW ST, CLAYPOO
13,900.00
15,000.00
2 MAX ENVIRONMENTAL ‐‐ YUKON FACILITY.233 MAX LN, Y
10,684.00
0
3 RED DOG OPERATIONS.90 MILES N OF KOTZEBUE, KOTZEB
8,618.00
170.26
4 KENNECOTT UTAH COPPER SMELTER & REFINERY.12000 W
8,200.00
3,793.00
5 U.S. ARMY FORT BRAGG.DPW ENV COMPLIANCE BRANCH
3,665.50
10.2
6 US ARMY MCALESTER ARMY AMMUNITION PLANT.1 C TR
3,281.00
0
7 FEDERAL CARTRIDGE CO.900 EHLEN DR, ANOKA MINNESO
3,191.85
928.41
8 NEVADA GOLD MINES LLC ‐ PHOENIX MINE.12 MI SE OF B
2,747.50
0.6
9 BUICK MINE/MILL.270 FOREST ROAD 2231, BOSS MISSOU
2,570.00
519
10 YAKIMA TRAINING CENTER‐ RANGE.970 FIRING CENTER R
2,137.50
0
11 MONTANA RESOURCES LLP.600 SHIELDS AVE, BUTTE MON
1,646.91
0.026
12 US ARMY AVIATION CENTER OF EXCELLENCE & FT RUCKER
1,395.00
0
13 US ARMY BLUE GRASS ARMY DEPOT.431 BATTLEFIELD ME
1,201.74
0
14 U.S. ARMY MANEUVER CENTER OF EXCELLENCE.DEPARTM
1,069.60
0
15 US ARMY FORT IRWIN NATIONAL TRAINING CENTER.DPW
1,005.00
0
16 CRIPPLE CREEK & VICTOR GOLD MINING CO.1280 HWY 67
995
0
17 US ARMY FORT AP HILL.19952 N RANGE RD, BOWLING GR
937.7
0.0044
18 PINTO VALLEY MINE.2911 N FOREST SERVICE RD 287, MIA
897
10
19 CMC STEEL TENNESSEE.1919 TENNESSEE AVE, KNOXVILLE
891.68
563.03
20 FLETCHER MINE/MILL.230 COUNTY ROAD 849, CENTERVIL
891
47
21 U.S. ARMY JOINT BASE LEWIS‐MCCHORD.11 MILES S OF T
830
1
22 COEUR ROCHESTER INC.HWY I‐80 EXT 119 23 MILES NE O
808
4.8
23 U.S. ARMY ‐ FORT SILL, OK (RANGE FACILITY).2515 RINGG
804.6
0
24 BRUSHY CREEK MINE/MILL.10627 HIGHWAY KK, BOSS MIS
787
47
25 OWENS CORNING INSULATING SYSTEMS LLC NEWARK OH
784
6
26 US ARMY RADFORD ARMY AMMUNITION PLANT.RT 114 R
758
84
27 SWEETWATER MINE/MILL.1382 SWEETWATER MINE ROA
738
27
28 FREEPORT‐MCMORAN MORENCI INC.4521 N US HWY 191
664
2.1
29 US PIPE & FOUNDRY CO LLC.2023 ST LOUIS AVE, BESSEME
663.7
20.7
30 US ARMY 1ST ARMORED DIV & FORT BLISS RANGES.TAYLO
611
0
31 U.S. MARINE CORPS CHOCOLATE MOUNTAINS AERIAL GU
585.3
0
32 MATERION NATURAL RESOURCES MINE.47 MI NW OF DEL
583
0.93
33 REPUBLIC STEEL‐CANTON PLANT.2633 EIGHTH ST NE, CAN
571
1,844.00
34 NUCOR STEEL NEBRASKA.2911 E NUCOR RD, NORFOLK NE
560.37
83.63
35 CLEVELAND‐CLIFFS STEEL LLC.3001 DICKEY RD, EAST CHIC
549.73
95.99
36 NEVADA GOLD MINES LLC‐CORTEZ DISTRICT.30 MILES S O
538.4
0.6
37 US ARMY FORT CARSON (CANTONMENT).1626 EVANS ST 
526.1
0
38 USS GARY WORKS.1 N BROADWAY, GARY INDIANA 46402
501.5
361.83
39 FIORE GOLD PAN MINE.8989 WEST HIGHWAY 50, ELY NEV
490
3.1
40 KENNECOTT UTAH COPPER MINE CONCENTRATORS & PO
476.82
14
41 ALLEGANY BALLISTICS LAB (NIROP).210 WV STATE RT 956
472
1
42 US MARINE CORPS MCB CAMP PENDLETON.BLDG 22165 1
453.5
0.2
43 BUICK RESOURCE RECYCLING FACILITY LLC.18594 HWY KK
445
4,080.00

44 US DOD USAF CANNON AFB MELROSE RANGE.3771 SUND
428
0
45 HUBBELL POWER SYSTEMS ‐ ALLEN STREET COMPLEX.210
427
65.73
46 US ARMY DONNELLY TRAINING AREA RANGES.RICHARDSO
419.8
0
47 US DOD USAF POINSETT BOMBING GUNNERY & ELECTRO
401
0
48 US DOD USAF NELLIS AFB TEST & TRAINGING RANGE.99 C
390.3
0
49 US ARMY ‐ ANNISTON ARMY DEPOT.7 FRANKFORD AVE D
386
18
50 MCIEAST‐MCB CAMLEJ MAIN FACILITY.12 POST LN, CAMP
385.0222
4.06
51 RAWHIDE MINE.58 MILES SE OF FALLON, FALLON NEVADA
366
0
52 US ARMY GARRISON FORT KNOX.125 6TH AVE STE 320 IM
351.796
0
53 RSCC WIRE & CABLE LLC.20 BRADLEY PARK RD, EAST GRAN
340
0
54 US ARMY POHAKULOA TRAINING AREA ‐ RANGE FACILITY
336
0
55 CLEVELAND‐CLIFFS CLEVELAND WORKS LLC.3060 EGGERS 
329
211
56 WIELAND ROLLED PRODUCTS NA ‐ EAST ALTON CASTING 
322.1
22.6
57 U.S. MARINE CORPS TWENTYNINE PALMS AIR GROUND C
301.7
2.5
58 AMG VANADIUM LLC.60790 SOUTHGATE RD, CAMBRIDGE
286.4
90.52
59 SWVA INC.2ND AVE & 17TH ST, HUNTINGTON WEST VIRG
278
595
60 US STEEL GRANITE CITY WORKS.1951 STATE ST, GRANITE 
267
388
61 TEXTRON AVIATION/EAST CAMPUS.9709 E CENTRAL AVE,
259
0.22
62 USS MON VALLEY WORKS ‐ EDGAR THOMSON PLANT.BRA
255.19
185.75
63 US ARMY HAWTHORNE ARMY DEPOT MAIN BASE.1 S MAI
253
0
64 US ARMY HAWTHORNE ARMY DEPOT NEW BOMB.HAWTH
252
0
65 BASF CORP.1729 E AVE, ERIE PENNSYLVANIA 16503 (ERIE)
250
1
66 AMERICAN ELECTRIC POWER KAMMER/MITCHELL PLANT.
250
50
67 CENTURY ALUMINUM OF KENTUCKY.1627 STATE RT 3543
237
134
68 EVRAZ ROCKY MOUNTAIN STEEL.2100 S FWY, PUEBLO CO
233.2
499.6
69 NUCOR STEEL ‐ A DIV OF NUCOR CORP.7825 W 21200 N, P
232.4
673.2
70 NEVADA GOLD MINES LLC ‐ CARLIN SOUTH AREA.6 MILES 
225.2
21.4
71 US DOE ‐SANDIA FIELD OFFICE.1515 EUBANK SE, ALBUQU
217
0
72 US ARMY FORT RILEY‐GARRISON.BUILDING 580 FIRST DIV
208.9
0
73 NUCOR STEEL BIRMINGHAM INC.2301 F L SHUTTLESWOR
205.7
55.33
74 US ARMY FORT DRUM.10000 10TH MOUNTAIN DIV DR, FO
196.4
0
75 GARFIELD FACILITY LLC.2601 W MOUNT PLEASANT BLVD, 
186.78
124.46
76 U.S. ARMY SCHOFIELD BARRACKS ‐ RANGE FACILITY.BEAV
183.1
0.1
77 US SILVER ‐ IDAHO INC.1041 LAKE GULCH RD, WALLACE ID
182.18
0
78 KEYSTONE STEEL & WIRE CO D/B/A LIBERTY STEEL & WIRE
180.3
180.3
79 FREEPORT‐MCMORAN BAGDAD INC.1 MAIN ST, BAGDAD 
177
2
80 FEDERAL METAL CO.7250 DIVISION ST, OAKWOOD VILLAG
165
61
81 US ARMY MANEUVER SUPPORT CENTER IMLD‐PW‐E.8112
161
0
82 PRAIRIE STATE GENERATING CO.1739 NEW MARIGOLD RO
160
113.9
83 NEVADA GOLD MINES LLC ‐ TURQUOISE RIDGE.28 MILES N
158.6
1.4
84 CMC STEEL FLORIDA.16770 REBAR RD, JACKSONVILLE FLO
151.48
85.1
85 TOYOTA MOTOR MANUFACTURING INDIANA INC.4000 TU
151
0
86 NEVADA GOLD MINES LLC ‐ GOLDSTRIKE MINES INC.27 M
148.6
47.4
87 GERDAU LONG STEEL NORTH AMERICA ‐ JACKSON MILL.8
147.11
659.87
88 CLEVELAND‐CLIFFS BURNS HARBOR LLC.250 W US HWY 12
146
2,332.00
89 SPRINGERVILLE GENERATING STATION.12 MILES N 12 MIL
140.7
17.4
90 ASWPENGG LLC.26300 MILES RD, BEDFORD OHIO 44146 (
140.2
378.4

91 US DOD USAF BARRY M GOLDWATER RANGE.HWY 85 35 M
134.1
0
92 PACIFICORP NAUGHTON PLANT.HWY 189 S OF KEMMERE
124.7
30.6
93 U S ARMY JRTC & FORT POLK.6661 WARRIOR TRAIL BLDG 
124
0
94 SDI LAFARGA LLC.1640 S RYAN RD, NEW HAVEN INDIANA 
121.7
120.5
95 TEXTRON AVIATION/WEST CAMPUS.1 CESSNA BLVD, WIC
117.9
0.16
96 NORTH STAR BLUESCOPE STEEL LLC.6767 COUNTY RD 9, D
116
46
97 HUBBELL POWER SYSTEMS ‐ EAST ST/PLASTICS.1190 E SW
113.87
139.55
98 HECLA GREENS CREEK MINING CO.13401 GLACIER HWY, J
111.8
13.4
99 U.S. DOD, USAF, DARE COUNTY BOMB RANGE.A‐10 AF SH
110.4
0
100 US ARMY NATIONAL GUARD CAMP ATTERBURY RANGES.H
110.2
0
 
Total of Top 100 facilities
97,180.83
35,090.86
 
Total disposal or other releases omitting double counted   
 
Reporting year (RY) 2020 is the most recent TRI data year available. Facilities reporting to TRI were 
required to submit their data to EPA by July 1 for the previous calendar year's activities. TRI Explorer 
is using the National Analysis data set (released to the public in released October 2021). This dataset
 includes revisions for the years 1988 to 2020 processed by EPA. Revisions submitted to EPA after this
 time are not reflected in TRI Explorer reports.
Users of TRI information should be aware that TRI data reflect releases and other waste management 
activities of chemicals, not whether (or to what degree) the public has been exposed to those 
chemicals. Release estimates alone are not sufficient to determine exposure or to calculate potential 
adverse effects on human health and the environment. TRI data, in conjunction with other 
information, can be used as a starting point in evaluating exposures that may result from releases 
and other waste management activities which involve toxic chemicals. The determination of potential 
risk depends upon many factors, including the toxicity of the chemical, the fate of the chemical, and
 the amount and duration of human or other exposure to the chemical after it is released. 
This report ranks the 100 largest facilities reporting in a particular disposal or other release category 
(by default, the report ranks the top 100 facilities by total on‐ and off‐site disposal or other releases). 
By sorting on different disposal or other release categories (e.g., Class I Wells, RCRA Subtitle C 
Landfills, etc.), TRI Explorer will generate a report ranking the top 100 facilities for the specific 
category chosen. Note that the top 100 facilities ranked for a specific category will change as the 
category changes (i.e., the 100 facilities ranked for Class I Wells is not necessarily the same 100 
facilities for RCRA Subtitle C Landfills).
For purposes of analysis, data reported as Range Code A is calculated using a value of 5 pounds, 
Range Code B is calculated using a value of 250 pounds and Range Code C is calculated using a value 
of 750 pounds.
The facility may have reported multiple NAICS codes to TRI in the current reporting year. See the 
facility profile report by clicking on the facility name to see a list of all NAICS codes submitted to TRI 
for the current reporting year.
A decimal point, or . denotes that the facility left that particular cell blank in its Form R submission (a 
zero in a cell denotes either that the facility reported 0 or NA in its Form R submission). NA in a cell 
denotes that the facility has submitted only Form A and thus the data for release, waste transfers or
 quantities of TRI chemicals in waste are not applicable. By submitting a Form A the facility has 
certified that its total annual reportable amount is less than 500 pounds, and that the facility does not
 manufacture, process, or otherwise use more than 1 million pounds of the toxic chemical.
The user selected list of chemicals applied in this report includes:
  Lead compounds

 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit B 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Category 
Title 
NFR 
2.C.7.a 
Copper production  
SNAP 
040309a 
Copper production 
ISIC  
2720 
Manufacture of basic precious and non-ferrous metals 
Version 
Guidebook 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Coordinator 
Jeroen Kuenen 
 
Contributing authors (including to earlier versions of this chapter)  
Jozef M. Pacyna, Otto Rentz, Dagmar Oertel, Tinus Pulles, Wilfred Appelman and Stijn Dellaert 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
2 
 
Contents 
1 
Overview .......................................................................................................... 3 
2 
Description of sources .................................................................................... 3 
2.1 
Process description ...................................................................................................................... 3 
2.2 
Techniques .................................................................................................................................... 6 
2.3 
Emissions ...................................................................................................................................... 7 
2.4 
Controls ......................................................................................................................................... 8 
3 
Methods............................................................................................................ 8 
3.1 
Choice of method ......................................................................................................................... 8 
3.2 
Tier 1 default approach ............................................................................................................... 9 
3.3 
Tier 2 technology-specific approach ........................................................................................ 11 
3.4 
Tier 3 emission modelling and use of facility data ................................................................. 16 
4 
Data quality ................................................................................................... 18 
4.1 
Completeness ............................................................................................................................. 18 
4.2 
Avoiding double counting with other sectors ......................................................................... 18 
4.3 
Verification .................................................................................................................................. 19 
4.4 
Developing a consistent time series and recalculation ......................................................... 20 
4.5 
Uncertainty assessment ............................................................................................................ 20 
4.6 
Inventory quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) ............................................................ 20 
4.7 
Gridding ....................................................................................................................................... 20 
4.8 
Reporting and documentation ................................................................................................. 20 
5 
Glossary .......................................................................................................... 20 
6 
References ..................................................................................................... 21 
7 
Point of enquiry ............................................................................................. 22 
 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
3 
 
1 Overview 
This chapter presents information on atmospheric emissions during the production of copper (Cu), 
which includes primary and secondary copper. This chapter only addresses the process emissions 
of copper production, whereas emissions originating from combustion are discussed in source 
category 1.A.2.b. 
There is an overall trend in copper production towards integrated/multi metallic smelters, where 
primary smelters are using increasingly secondary material feeds and secondary smelters are using 
also sulphur-containing feeds. Generally speaking, there are three steps in the pyrometallurgical 
primary copper production process: roasting of ores to remove sulphur; smelting of roaster product 
to remove a part of the gangue for production of the copper matte; and converting the copper matte 
to blister copper. Atmospheric emissions of sulphur dioxide and heavy metals on fine particles occur 
during all the above mentioned processes. 
Various trace elements from impurities are present in the copper ores, which are emitted during the 
production process. The process is a major source of atmospheric arsenic and copper (50% of the 
global emissions of these elements), indium (almost 90%), antimony, cadmium and selenium 
(approximately 30%) and nickel and tin (approximately 10%) (Nriagu and Pacyna, 1998). 
In secondary copper smelting, pyrometallurgical processes are used to rework scrap and other 
secondary materials. As with primary copper production, final refining, where practised, is 
electrolytic. This chapter describes the methods to estimate emissions of atmospheric pollutants 
during the production of copper. 
2 Description of sources 
2.1 
Process description 
2.1.1 Primary copper production 
The pyrometallurgical copper production route entails a number of steps, depending on the 
concentrate used. The majority of concentrates are sulphidic and the stages involved are roasting, 
smelting, converting, refining and electro-refining. Roasting and smelting are usually carried out 
simultaneously in a single furnace at high temperatures to produce a melt that can be separated 
into a matte (copper sulphide with some iron sulphide) and some slag rich in iron and silica 
(European Commission, 2014). 
In the traditional pyrometallurgical copper smelting process, the blister copper is fire refined in an 
anode furnace, cast into ‘anodes’ and sent to an electrolytic refinery for further impurity elimination. 
The currently used copper smelters process ore concentrates by drying them in fluidised bed dryers 
and then converting and refining the dried product in the same manner as the traditionally used 
process (US EPA, 1993). 
Concentrates usually contain 20–30% Cu. In roasting, charge material of copper mixed with a 
siliceous flux is heated in air to about 650 °C, eliminating 20–50% of sulphur and portions of volatile 
trace elements. The roasted product, calcine, serves as a dried and heated charge for the smelting 
furnace. 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
4 
 
In the smelting process, calcines are melted with siliceous flux in a flash smelting furnace to produce 
copper matte, a molten mixture of cuprous sulphide, ferrous sulphide, and some trace elements. 
Matte contains usually 35–65% of copper. Heat required in the smelting process comes from partial 
oxidation of the sulphide charge and from burning external fuel. Several smelting technologies are 
currently used in the copper industry, including reverberatory smelting, flash smelting (two 
processes are currently in commercial use: the INCO process and the Outokumpu process), and the 
Noranda and electric processes.  
In the reverberatory process heat is supplied by combustion of oil, gas, or pulverised coal. The 
temperature in the furnace can reach 1500 °C. Flash furnace smelting combines the operations of 
roasting and smelting to produce a high grade copper matte from concentrates and flux. Most flash 
furnaces use the heat generated from partial oxidation of their sulphide charge to provide much or 
all of the energy required for smelting. The temperature in the furnace reaches between 1200 and 
1300 °C. The Noranda process takes advantage of the heat energy available from the copper ore. 
The remaining thermal energy is supplied by oil burners, or by coal mixed with the ore concentrates. 
For the smelting in electric arc furnaces, heat is generated by the flow of an electric current in carbon 
electrodes lowered through the furnace roof and submerged in the slag layer of the molten bath (US 
EPA, 1993; UN ECE, 1994). 
Concerning emissions of air pollutants from the smelting operations, all the above described 
operations emit trace elements. Flash furnace smelting produces offgas streams containing high 
concentrations of sulphur dioxide. Electric arc furnaces do not produce fuel combustion gases, so 
flow rates are lower and so are the sulphur dioxide concentrations. 
The final step in the production of blister copper is converting. The remaining iron and sulphur in 
the matter is removed in this process leaving molten blister copper. Blister copper usually contains 
between 98.5% and 99.5% pure copper with the rest consisting of trace elements, such as gold, silver, 
antimony, arsenic, bismuth, iron, lead, nickel, selenium, sulphur, tellurium, and zinc. There are 
various converting technologies applied in the copper production. The temperature in the converting 
furnace reaches 1100 C. 
2.1.2 Secondary copper production 
A secondary copper smelter is defined as any plant or factory in which copper-bearing scrap or 
copper-bearing materials, other than copper-bearing concentrates (ores) derived from a mining 
operation, is processed by metallurgical or chemical process into refined copper and copper powder 
(a premium product).  
The recycling of copper is the most comprehensive among the non-ferrous metals. The copper metal 
scrap can be in the form of: 
 
copper scrap, such as fabrication rejects, wire scrap, plumbing scrap, apparatus, electrical 
systems or products from cable processing; 
 
alloy scrap, such as brass, gunmetal, bronze, in the form of radiators, fittings, machine parts, 
turnings or shredder metals; 
 
copper-iron scrap like electric motors or parts thereof, plated scrap, circuit elements and 
switchboard units, telephone scrap, transformers and shredder materials. 
Another large group of copper-containing materials is composed of oxidised materials, including 
drosses, ashes, slags, scales, ball mill fines, catalysts as well as materials resulting from pollution 
control systems. 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
5 
 
The copper content of scrap varies from 1% to nearly 100% (EIPPCB, 2014). The associated metals 
that have to be removed are mainly zinc, lead, tin, iron, nickel and aluminium as well as certain 
amounts of precious metals. 
Depending on their chemical composition, the raw materials of a secondary copper smelter are 
processed in different types of furnaces, including: 
 
blast furnaces (up to 30% Cu in the average charge); 
 
mini smelter; 
 
top blown rotary furnace (TBRC); 
 
ISA Smelt; 
 
converters (about 75% Cu); 
 
electric arc furnaces (about 95% Cu); 
 
Contimelt (>99% Cu). 
The blast furnace metal (‘black copper’) is treated in a converter, the converter metal is refined in an 
anode furnace. In each step additional raw material with corresponding copper content is added. 
In the blast furnace, a mixture of raw materials, iron scrap, limestone and sand as well as coke is 
charged at the top. Air that can be enriched with oxygen is blown through the tuyeres, the coke is 
burnt and the charge materials are smelted under reducing conditions. Black copper and slag are 
discharged from tapholes. 
The Mini Smelter is used for secondary copper production, using scrap that contains iron and tin. In 
this application, the iron acts as the reducing agent in the first stage to produce metallic copper and 
then oxygen is blown into the melt to oxidise iron and the other metals (lead and tin) present which 
are recovered in the slag. The oxidation of the iron content provides the heat to drive the process 
and excess heat is recovered (European Commission, 2014). 
The converters used in primary copper smelting, working on mattes containing iron sulfide, generate 
surplus heat and additions of scrap copper are often used to control temperature. The converter 
provides a convenient and cheap form of scrap treatment but often with only moderately efficient 
gas cleaning. Alternatively, hydrometallurgical treatment of scrap, using ammonia leaching, yields to 
solutions which can be reduced by hydrogen to obtain copper powder (Barbour et al., 1978). 
Alternatively, these solutions can be treated by solvent extraction to produce feed to a copper-
winning cell. 
Converter copper is charged together with copper raw materials in an anode furnace operation. For 
smelting the charge, oil or coal dust is used , mainly in reverberatory furnaces. After smelting, air is 
blown on the bath to oxidise the remaining impurities. 
Leaded brasses, containing as much as 3% lead, are widely used in various applications and recycling 
of their scrap waste is an important activity. Such scrap usually contains much swarf and turnings 
coated with lubricant and cutting oils. Copper-containing cables and motors contain plastic or rubber 
insulants, varnishes, and lacquers. In such cases, scrap needs pretreatment to remove these non-
metallics. The smaller sizes of scrap can be pretreated thermally in a rotary kiln provided with an 
after-burner to consume smoke and oil vapors (the so-called Intal process). There are also various 
techniques available to remove rubber and plastic insulations of cables (Barbour et al., 1978; UN ECE, 
1994). 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
6 
 
The production of copper from either primary or secondary material streams is illustrated in Figure 
2.1. 
Figure 2.1 
Schematic description of a combined primary/secondary copper production 
process, using ore concentrate with silica fluxes, slags, alloy scrap and copper 
scrap as inputs, and anode copper as output from the fire refining process. 
 
 
2.2 
Techniques 
The descriptions of the different processes used in the process of producing primary and secondary 
copper are given in section 2.1. In the converting process during primary copper production, two 
techniques can be distinguished: 
 
batch converting: blowing an air/oxygen mixture through the matte recovered from the smelting 
operation; 
 
continuous converting, of which three types exist. the Mitsubishi and Noranda converters 
receive molten feed for conversion, while in the Kennecott/Outokumpu process the matte from 
the smelting furnace is first granulated in water, crushed and dried. 
More information about these techniques can be found in the section on copper production in the 
Reference Document on Best Available Techniques (BREF) for the Non-Ferrous Metal Industries 
(European Commission, 2014) with expected adaptation in 2016 (1). 
                                                                 
(1) The BREF document for non-ferrous metals industries is presently in final draft stage. A finalised version is 
expected to be adopted in 2016. Information concerning the status of BREF documents is available at 
http://eippcb.jrc.es/reference/. The previous version of the BREF was published in 2001 (European Commission, 
2001). 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
7 
 
2.3 
Emissions 
Pollutants released during copper production are particulate matter (PM), sulphur oxides (SOx), 
nitrogen oxides (NOx), volatile organic compounds (non-methane VOC and methane (CH4)), carbon 
monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), trace elements, and selected persistent 
organic pollutants (POPs). The POPs are mostly dioxins and furans, which are emitted from shaft 
furnaces, converters, and flame furnaces. 
More information on emissions and control techniques used in copper production can be found in 
the revised BREF on non-ferrous metal industries (European Commission, 2014). 
Note that PM emission factors in the Guidebook represent primary emissions from the activities and 
not formation of secondary aerosol from chemical reaction in the atmosphere after release. 
A number of factors influence the measurement and determination of primary PM emissions from 
activities and, the quantity of PM determined in an emission measurement depends to a large extent 
on the measurement conditions. This is particularly true of activities involving high temperature and 
semi-volatile emission components – in such instances the PM emission may be partitioned between 
a solid/aerosol phase and material which is gaseous at the sampling point but which can condense 
in the atmosphere. The proportion of filterable and condensable material will vary depending on the 
temperature of the flue gases and in sampling equipment.  
A range of filterable PM measurement methods are applied around the world typically with filter 
temperatures of 70-160°C (the temperature is set by the test method). Condensable fractions can 
be determined directly by recovering condensed material from chilled impinger systems 
downstream of a filter – note that this is condensation without dilution and can require additional 
processing to remove sampling artefacts. A common approach for total PM includes dilution where 
sampled flue or exhaust gases are mixed with ambient air (either using a dilution tunnel or dilution 
sampling systems) which collect the filterable and condensable components on a filter at lower 
temperatures (but depending on the method this can be 15-52°C). 
Copper smelters are a source of sulphur oxides (SOx). Emissions are generated from the roasters, 
smelting furnaces and converters. Fugitive emissions are generated during material handling 
operations. Remaining smelter operations use material containing very little sulphur, resulting in 
insignificant SO2 emissions (US EPA, 1995). Here only emissions from combustion processes with 
contact are relevant. 
Energy demand 
Copper production requires energy in most stages, the energy use of the electrolytic process is most 
significant. The production energy (net) requirement for a number of processes using copper 
concentrate is in the range 14 – 20 GJ/t of copper cathode. The exact figure depends mainly on the 
concentrate (% S and Fe), but also on the smelting unit used, the degree of oxygen enrichment and 
the collection and use of process heat. Comparative data based solely on the type of smelter are 
therefore liable to inaccuracies. The utilisation of the energy content of the concentrate is more 
important and smelters that achieve autogenic operation have lower energy use (European 
Commission, 2014). 
The energy consumed by the electro-refining stage of copper production is reported to be 300 - 400 
kWh per tonne of copper, but the energy use is considerably higher when high impurity anodes are 
electro-refined. The type of blank cathode used (stainless steel or copper) mainly influences the 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
8 
 
efficiency of tank house and this can range from 92% to 97% in terms of current efficiency (European 
Commission, 2014). 
2.4 
Controls 
2.4.1 Primary copper production 
Emission controls on primary copper smelters are employed for controlling sulphur dioxide and 
particulate matter emissions resulting from roasters, smelting furnaces, and converters. Control of 
sulphur dioxide emissions is achieved by absorption to sulphuric acid in the sulphuric acid plants, 
which are commonly a part of copper smelting plants. Reverberatory furnace effluent contains 
minimal SO2 and is usually released directly to the atmosphere with no SO2 reduction. Effluents from 
the other types of smelter furnaces contain higher concentrations of SO2 and are treated in sulphuric 
acid plants before being vented. Single-contact sulphuric acid plants achieve 96% to 99.1% 
conversion of SO2 from plant effluent gas. Double-contact acid plants collect from 99.2% to more 
than 99.9% of the SO2 (European Commission, 2014). Absorption of the SO2 in dimethylaniline 
solution has also been used in US-American smelters to produce liquid SO2 (US EPA, 1995). 
Electrostatic precipitators (ESPs) are the common particulate matter control devices employed at 
copper smeltering facilities. The control efficiency of wet ESPs can reach about 99.9 %. It should be 
added that most of the trace elements are condensed on very fine particles, e.g. <1.0 µm diameter, 
and the control efficiency for these particles is lower (US EPA, 2003). 
A detailed description of control techniques and Best Available Techniques for the copper 
production is available in the revised BREF (European Commission, 2014). 
2.4.2 Secondary copper production 
Controls in secondary copper production should include effective emission collecting arrangements 
such as hooding, enclosure and boosted suction systems for both primary exhaust gases and fugitive 
emissions. Reducing dust and metal emissions can be done using a bag filter and/or a scrubber in 
combination with an ESP. The use of an afterburner, quench, injection of lime and/or active coal 
before the bag filter may further reduce emission levels, including emissions of dioxin and other 
organic compounds (European Commission, 2014). 
3 Methods 
3.1 
Choice of method 
Figure 3.1 presents the procedure to select methods for estimating process emissions from copper 
production. The basic idea is as follows. 
 
If detailed information is available: use it. 
 
If the source category is a key category, a Tier 2 or better method must be applied and detailed 
input data must be collected. The decision tree in Figure 3.1 directs the user in such cases to the 
Tier 2 method, since it is expected that it is more easy to obtain the necessary input data for this 
approach than to collect facility level data needed for a Tier 3 estimate; 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
9 
 
 
The alternative of applying a Tier 3 method using detailed process modelling is not explicitly 
included in this decision tree. However, detailed modelling will always be done at facility level 
and results of such modelling could be seen as ‘facility data’ in the decision tree. 
 
Figure 3.1 
Decision tree for source category 2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
3.2 
Tier 1 default approach 
3.2.1 Algorithm 
The Tier 1 approach for process emissions from copper production uses the general equation: 
pollutant
production
pollutant
EF
AR
E


 
(1) 
Where: 
Epollutant 
= 
the emission of the specified pollutant 
ARproduction 
= 
the activity rate for the copper production 
EFpollutant 
= 
the emission factor for the pollutant 
This equation is applied at the national level, using annual national total copper production. 
Information on the production of copper, suitable for estimating emissions using the simpler 
Start
Facility data
Available?
All production
covered
Use Tier 3
Facility data
only
Technology 
Stratification
available?
Use Tier 2
technology specific 
activity data 
and EFs
Key source?
Get 
technology stratified 
activity data 
and EFs
Apply Tier 1
default EFs
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
Use Tier 3
Facility data &
extrapolation

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
10 
 
estimation methodology (Tier 1 and 2), is widely available from United Nations statistical yearbooks 
or national statistics.  
The Tier 1 emission factors assume an ‘averaged’ or typical technology and abatement 
implementation in the country and integrate all different sub-processes in the production of copper, 
from the treatment of the ore concentrate until after the fire refining, producing anode copper. 
In cases where specific abatement options are to be taken into account a Tier 1 method is not 
applicable and a Tier 2 or Tier 3 approach must be used.  
3.2.2 Default emission factors 
The Tier 1 approach needs emission factors for all relevant pollutants. These default emission factors 
as given in Table 3.1 have been derived from various references. The emission factors for total 
suspended particulate matter (TSP), SOx, Pb, As and Cu are from the BREF document for the non-
ferrous metal industry (European Commission, 2014), while PM10 and PM2.5 are interpreted from the 
profile used in the Coordinated European Particulate Matter Emission Inventory Program (CEPMEIP) 
study (Visschedijk et al., 2004) for a conventional plant. Other values are taken from the ‘Estimation 
of willingness-to-pay to reduce risks of exposure to heavy metals and cost-benefit analysis for 
reducing heavy metals occurrence in Europe’ (Espreme) project (Theloke et al., 2008) for plants with 
limited control. To estimate Tier 1 emission factors, it is assumed that about 75% of the copper 
production is primary copper and 25% is secondary copper (Althaus, 2003). 
Emission factors in the BREF documents are mostly given in ranges. Where these emission factors 
are used in the table below, the range is interpreted as the 95% confidence interval, while the 
geometric mean of this range is chosen as the value for the emission factor. 
Emissions of NOx and CO are assumed to originate mainly from combustion and are discussed in 
chapter 1.A.2.b. All other emissions are assumed to originate primarily from the process and are 
therefore discussed in the present chapter. 
Table 3.1 
Tier 1 emission factors for source category 2.C.7.a Copper production. 
Tier 1 default emission factors 
  
Code 
Name 
NFR source 
category 
2.C.7.a 
Copper production 
Fuel 
NA 
Not applicable 
HCH 
Not estimated 
NOx, CO, NMVOC, NH3, Se, Zn, Benzo(a)pyrene, Benzo(a)fluoranthene, 
Benzo(k)fluoranthene, Indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene, HCB,  
Pollutant 
Value 
Unit 
95 % confidence 
interval 
Reference 
Lower 
Upper 
TSP 
320 
g/Mg copper 
100 
1 000 
European Commission (2014) 
PM10 
250 
g/Mg copper 
80 
800 
Visschedijk et al. (2004) applied on 
TSP 
PM2.5 
190 
g/Mg copper 
60 
600 
Visschedijk et al. (2004) applied on 
TSP 
BC2 
0.1 
% of PM2.5 
0.05 
0.2 
US EPA (2011, file no.: 91158) 
SOx 
3000 
g/Mg copper 
500 
18 000 
European Commission (2014) 
Pb 
19 
g/Mg copper 
6 
60 
European Commission (2014) 
                                                                 
(2) For the purposes of this guidance, BC emission factors are assumed to equal those for elemental carbon 
(EC). For further information, please refer to Chapter 1.A.1 Energy Industries. 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
11 
 
Cd 
11 
g/Mg copper 
9 
19 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
Hg 
0.023 
g/Mg copper 
0.016 
0.039 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
As 
4 
g/Mg copper 
0.5 
27 
 European Commission (2014) 
Cr 
16 
g/Mg copper 
11 
22 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
Cu 
32 
g/Mg copper 
8 
130 
European Commission (2014) 
Ni 
14 
g/Mg copper 
8.7 
22 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
PCBs 
0.9 
µg/Mg copper 
0.6 
1.5 
Note  
PCDD/F 
5 
µg I-TEQ/Mg 
copper 
0.01 
800 
UNEP (2005) 
Note: The EF for PCB may be revised in the future based on new information from UNEP: Toolkit for Identification 
and 
Quantification 
of 
Releases 
of 
Dioxins 
and 
Furans 
and 
Other 
Unintentional 
POPs: 
http://chm.pops.int/Implementation/UnintentionalPOPs/ToolkitforUPOPs/Overview/tabid/372/Default.aspx 
3.2.3 Activity data 
Information on the production of copper in primary smelters, suitable for estimating emissions when 
using Tier 1 or Tier 2 is widely available from the United Nations statistical yearbooks or national 
statistics. 
3.3 
Tier 2 technology-specific approach 
3.3.1  Algorithm 
The Tier 2 approach is similar to the Tier 1 approach. To apply the Tier 2 approach, both the activity 
data and the emission factors need to be stratified according to the different techniques that may 
occur in the country. 
The Tier 2 approach is as follows: 
Stratify the copper production in the country to model the different product and process types 
occurring in the national copper industry into the inventory by:  
 
defining the production using each of the separate product and/or process types (together 
called ‘technologies’ in the formulae below) separately; and 
 
applying technology specific emission factors for each process type: 



es
technologi
,pollutant
technology
technology
production
pollutant
EF
AR
E
,
 
(2) 
where: 
ARproduction,technology 
= 
the production rate within the source category, using this 
specific technology 
EFtechnology,pollutant 
= 
the emission factor for this technology and this pollutant 
A country where only one technology is implemented will result in a penetration factor of 100 % and 
the algorithm reduces to: 
,pollutant
technology
production
pollutant
EF
AR
E


 
(3) 
where: 
Epollutant 
= 
the emission of the specified pollutant 
ARproduction 
= 
the activity rate for the copper production 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
12 
 
EFpollutant 
= 
the emission factor for this pollutant 
The emission factors in this approach will still include all sub-processes within the industry from the 
feeding of raw materials until the produced copper is shipped to the customers. 
3.3.2 Technology-specific emission factors 
This subsection provides specific emission factors for primary and secondary copper production. 
For the Tier 2 approach, emissions of NOx and CO are assumed to originate mainly from combustion 
and are discussed in chapter 1.A.2.b. All other emissions are assumed to originate primarily from 
the process and are therefore discussed in this chapter. 
Emission factors in the BREF documents are mostly given in ranges. The range is interpreted as the 
95% confidence interval, while the geometric mean of this range is chosen as the value for the 
emission factor in the tables below. 
Table 3.2 
Tier 2 emission factors for source category 2.C.7.a Copper production, primary 
copper. 
Tier 2 default emission factors 
  
Code 
Name 
NFR source category 
2.C.7.
a 
Copper production 
Fuel 
NA 
SNAP (if applicable) 
040309a Copper production 
Technologies/Practices 
Primary copper production 
Region or regional 
conditions 
 
Abatement technologies 
 
Not applicable 
HCH 
Not estimated 
NOx, CO, NMVOC, NH3, Se, Zn, PCBs, Benzo(a)pyrene, Benzo(a)fluoranthene, 
Benzo(k)fluoranthene, Indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene, HCB 
Pollutant 
Value 
Unit 
95 % confidence 
interval 
Reference 
Lower 
Upper 
TSP 
320 
g/Mg copper 
130 
800 
European Commission 
(2014) 
PM10 
260 
g/Mg copper 
105 
640 
Visschedijk et al. (2004) 
applied on TSP 
PM2.5 
200 
g/Mg copper 
80 
480 
Visschedijk et al. (2004) 
applied on TSP 
BC 
0.1 
% of PM2.5 
0.05 
0.2 
US EPA (2011, file no.: 
91158) 
SOx 
10400 
g/Mg copper 
6 000 
18 000 
European Commission 
(2014) 
Pb 
16 
g/Mg copper 
6 
45 
European Commission 
(2014) 
Cd 
15 
g/Mg copper 
12 
23 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
Hg 
0.031 
g/Mg copper 
0.021 
0.052 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
As 
7 
g/Mg copper 
2 
27 
European Commission 
(2014) 
Cr 
21 
g/Mg copper 
15 
29 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
Cu 
57 
g/Mg copper 
25 
130 
European Commission 
(2014) 
Ni 
19 
g/Mg copper 
12 
29 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
PCDD/F 
0.01 
µg I-TEQ/Mg 
copper 
0.003 
0.03 
UNEP (2005) 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
13 
 
Table 3.3 
Tier 2 emission factors for source category 2.C.7.a Copper production, secondary 
copper. 
Tier 2 default emission factors 
  
Code 
Name 
NFR source category 
2.C.7.
a 
Copper production 
Fuel 
NA 
SNAP (if applicable) 
040309a Copper production 
Technologies/Practices 
Secondary copper production 
Region or regional 
conditions 
  
Abatement technologies 
  
Not applicable 
HCH 
Not estimated 
NOx, CO, NMVOC, NH3, Hg, Cr, Se, Zn, Benzo(a)pyrene, Benzo(a)fluoranthene, 
Benzo(k)fluoranthene, Indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene, HCB,  
Pollutant 
Value 
Unit 
95 % confidence 
interval 
Reference 
Lower 
Upper 
TSP 
320 
g/Mg copper 
100 
1 000 
European Commission 
(2014) 
PM10 
250 
g/Mg copper 
80 
800 
Visschedijk et al. (2004) 
applied on TSP 
PM2.5 
190 
g/Mg copper 
60 
600 
Visschedijk et al. (2004) 
applied on TSP 
BC 
0.1 
% of PM2.5 
0.05 
0.2 
US EPA (2011, file no.: 
91158) 
SOx 
1320 
g/Mg copper 
500 
3 500 
European Commission 
(2014) 
Pb 
24 
g/Mg copper 
10 
60 
European Commission 
(2014) 
Cd 
2.3 
g/Mg copper 
1.1 
4.6 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
As 
2 
g/Mg copper 
0.5 
5 
European Commission 
(2014) 
Cu 
28 
g/Mg copper 
8 
100 
European Commission 
(2014) 
Ni 
0.13 
g/Mg copper 
0.057 
0.17 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
PCBs 
3.7 
µg/Mg copper 
2.4 
6 
Note  
PCDD/F 
50 
µg I-TEQ/Mg 
copper 
0.03 
800 
UNEP (2005) 
Notes: The EF for PCB may be revised in the future based on new information from UNEP: Toolkit for Identification 
and 
Quantification 
of 
Releases 
of 
Dioxins 
and 
Furans 
and 
Other 
Unintentional 
POPs: 
http://chm.pops.int/Implementation/UnintentionalPOPs/ToolkitforUPOPs/Overview/tabid/372/Default.aspx 
The BC EF for secondary cupper production is assumed to be the same as for primary production.  
These PM factors represent filterable PM emissions only (excluding any condensable fraction). 
3.3.3 Abatement 
A number of add-on technologies exist that are aimed at reducing the emissions of specific 
pollutants. The resulting emission can be calculated by replacing the technology specific emission 
factor with an abated emission factor as given in the formula: 
unabated
technology
abatement
abated
technology
EF
EF
,
,
)
1(




 
(4) 
where: 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
14 
 
EF technology, abated  
= 
the emission factor after implementation of the abatement 
η abatement 
 
= 
the abatement efficiency 
EF technology, unabated 
= 
the emission factor before implementation of the abatement 
Typical abatement efficiencies and pollutant flue gas concentrations related to a specific abatement 
technique can be found in the revised BREF document on the non-ferrous metal industries 
(European Commission, 2014).  
Table 3.4, Table 3.5 and Table 3.6 present default abatement efficiencies for particulate matter, SOx 
and heavy metal emissions. The particulate matter (PM) efficiencies for older abatement equipment 
are based on AP 42 (US EPA, 1998), while efficiencies for modern equipment are based on the draft 
BREF document for the large combustion plants sector (European Commission, 2013). It should be 
noted that the efficiencies from the LCP BREF are primarily based on observations made for fly ash 
from coal-fired power plants. For other types of dust efficiencies may be lower. The abatement 
efficiencies for heavy metals are based on Theloke et al. (2008) and the SOx abatement efficiency for 
sulphuric acid plants is taken from the BREF (European Commission, 2014). Final abatement 
efficiency is dependent on the maintenance and state of the abatement equipment installed. 
Table 3.4 
Dust abatement efficiencies (ηabatement) for source category 2.C.7.a Copper 
production 
Tier 2 Abatement efficiencies 
  
Code 
Name 
NFR Source 
Category 
2.C.7.a 
Copper production 
Fuel 
NA 
not applicable 
SNAP (if applicable) 
040309a 
Copper production 
Abatement 
technology 
Pollutant 
Efficiency 
95% confidence 
interval 
Reference 
Default Value 
Lower 
Upper 
Multicyclone 
particle > 10 μm 
78.7% 
36.2% 
92.9% 
US EPA (1998) 
10 μm > particle > 2.5 
μm  
75.8% 
27.5% 
91.9% 
2.5 μm > particle 
75.0% 
25.0% 
91.7% 
Spray tower 
particle > 10 μm 
77.6% 
32.7% 
92.5% 
US EPA (1998) 
10 μm > particle > 2.5 
μm  
74.4% 
23.2% 
91.5% 
2.5 μm > particle 
72.5% 
17.5% 
90.8% 
ESP + spray tower 
particle > 10 μm 
95.1% 
85.3% 
98.4% 
US EPA (1998) 
10 μm > particle > 2.5 
μm  
94.6% 
83.8% 
98.2% 
2.5 μm > particle 
96.3% 
88.8% 
98.8% 
Wet ESP 
particle > 10 μm 
98.2% 
94.5% 
99.4% 
US EPA (1998) 
10 μm > particle > 2.5 
μm  
96.4% 
89.2% 
98.8% 
2.5 μm > particle 
94.4% 
83.1% 
98.1% 
Modern ESP 
particle > 10 μm 
>99.95% 
 
 
European Commission 
(2013) 
10 μm > particle > 2.5 
μm  
>99.95% 
 
 
2.5 μm > particle 
97.4% 
>96.5% 
>98.3% 
Crossflow packed 
bed scrubber 
particle > 10 μm 
71.9% 
15.7% 
90.6% 
US EPA (1998) 
10 μm > particle > 2.5 
μm  
67.9% 
3.8% 
89.3% 
2.5 μm > particle 
76.9% 
30.6% 
92.3% 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
15 
 
Floating bed 
scrubber 
particle > 10 μm 
79.6% 
38.8% 
93.2% 
US EPA (1998) 
10 μm > particle > 2.5 
μm  
76.8% 
30.4% 
92.3% 
2.5 μm > particle 
75.0% 
25.0% 
91.7% 
Venturi Scrubber 
particle > 10 μm 
96.7% 
90.0% 
98.9% 
US EPA (1998) 
10 μm > particle > 2.5 
μm  
96.2% 
88.6% 
98.7% 
2.5 μm > particle 
92.3% 
77.0% 
97.4% 
Modern Venturi 
scrubber 
particle > 10 μm 
>99.9% 
 
 
European Commission 
(2013) 
10 μm > particle > 2.5 
μm  
99.9% 
 
 
2.5 μm > particle 
99.0% 
98.5% 
99.5% 
Dry + secondary 
scrubber 
particle > 10 μm 
99.1% 
97.4% 
99.7% 
US EPA (1998) 
10 μm > particle > 2.5 
μm  
98.3% 
95.0% 
99.4% 
2.5 μm > particle 
97.5% 
92.5% 
99.2% 
Coated fabric filter 
particle > 10 μm 
98.1% 
94.3% 
99.4% 
US EPA (1998) 
10 μm > particle > 2.5 
μm  
96.3% 
88.8% 
98.8% 
2.5 μm > particle 
94.4% 
83.1% 
98.1% 
Modern fabric filter 
particle > 10 μm 
>99.95% 
 
 
European Commission 
(2013) 
10 μm > particle > 2.5 
μm  
>99.9% 
 
 
2.5 μm > particle 
>99.6% 
 
 
 
 
Table 3.5 
SOx abatement efficiencies (ηabatement) for source category 2.C.7.a Copper 
production 
Tier 2 Abatement efficiencies 
  
Code 
Name 
NFR Source 
Category 
2.C.7.a 
Copper production 
Fuel 
NA 
not applicable 
SNAP (if applicable) 
040309a 
Copper production 
Abatement 
technology 
Pollutant 
Efficiency 
95% confidence interval 
Reference 
Default Value 
Lower 
Upper 
Single contact 
sulphuric acid plants 
SOx 
97.6% 
96% 
99.10% 
European Commission (2014) 
Double contact 
sulphuric acid plants 
SOx 
99.6% 
99.20% 
99.97% 
European Commission (2014) 
 
 
 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
16 
 
Table 3.6 
Metal abatement efficiencies (ηabatement) for source category 2.C.7.a Copper 
production 
Tier 2 Abatement efficiencies 
  
Code 
Name 
NFR Source Category 
2.C.7.a 
Copper production 
Fuel 
NA 
not applicable 
SNAP (if applicable) 
040309a 
Copper production 
Abatement 
technology 
Pollutant 
Efficiency 
95% confidence interval 
Reference 
Default Value 
Lower 
Upper 
Dry ESP 
Hg 
5% 
0% 
68% 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
Cd 
84.7% 
54% 
95% 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
Ni 
84.7% 
54% 
95% 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
As 
84.7% 
54% 
95% 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
Pb 
84.7% 
54% 
95% 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
State of the art fabric 
filter 
Hg 
10% 
0% 
70% 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
Cd 
99.99% 
99.97% 
99.997% 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
Ni 
99.99% 
99.97% 
99.997% 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
As 
99.99% 
99.97% 
99.997% 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
Pb 
99.99% 
99.97% 
99.997% 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
PCDD/F 
10% 
0% 
70% 
Theloke et al. (2008) 
 
3.3.4 Activity data 
Information on the production of copper, suitable for estimating emissions using the simpler 
estimation methodology (Tier 1 and 2), is widely available from United Nations statistical yearbooks 
or national statistics.  
For a Tier 2 approach these data need to be stratified according to technologies applied. Typical 
sources for these data might be industrial branch organisations within the country or from specific 
questionnaires to the individual copper production sites. 
3.4 
Tier 3 emission modelling and use of facility data 
3.4.1 Algorithm 
Two different emission estimation go beyond the technology-specific approach described above: 
 
detailed modelling of the copper production process; 
 
facility-level emission reports. 
Detailed process modelling 
A Tier 3 emission estimate using process details will make separate estimates for the consecutive 
steps in the production process of copper: 
 
roasting/drying; 
 
smelting; 
 
converting; 
 
fire refining. 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
17 
 
Facility-level data 
Where facility-level emissions data of sufficient quality (see the guidance chapter on QA/QC in Part 
A of the Guidebook) are available, it is good practice to indeed use these data. There are two 
possibilities: 
 
facility reports cover all copper production in the country; 
 
facility-level emission reports are not available for all copper plants in the country. 
If facility level data cover all copper production in the country, it is good practice to compare the 
implied emission factors (reported emissions divided by the national copper production) with the 
default emission factor values or technology-specific emission factors. If the implied emission factors 
are outside the 95 % confidence intervals for the values given below, it is good practice to explain 
the reasons for this in the inventory report 
If the total annual copper production in the country is not included in the total of the facility reports, 
it is good practice to estimate the missing part of the national total emissions from the source 
category, using extrapolation by applying: 
EF
Production
Production
National
E
E
Facilities
Facility
Facilities
pollutant
Facility
pollutant
Total












,
,
 
(5) 
Where: 
Etotal,pollutant 
= 
the total emission of a pollutant for all facilities within the source 
category 
Efacility,pollutant 
 = 
the emission of the pollutant as reported by a facility 
Productiontotal 
 
= 
the production rate in the source category 
Productionfacility 
 
= 
the production rate in a facility 
EFpollutant 
 = 
the emission factor for the pollutant 
Depending on the specific national circumstances and the coverage of the facility-level reports as 
compared to the total national copper production, it is good practice to choose the emission factor 
(EF) in this equation from the following possibilities, in decreasing order of preference: 
 
technology-specific emission factors, based on knowledge of the types of technologies 
implemented at the facilities where facility level emission reports are not available; 
 
the implied emission factor derived from the available emission reports: 



Facilities
Facility
Facilities
pollutant
Facility
Production
E
EF
,
 
(6) 
 
the default Tier 1 emission factor: this option should only be chosen if the facility level emission 
reports cover more than 90 % of the total national production. 
3.4.2 Tier 3 emission modelling and use of facility data 
Copper plants are major industrial facilities and emission data for individual plants might be 
available through a pollutant release and transfer registry (PRTR) or another emission reporting 
scheme. When the quality of such data is assured by a well-developed quality assurance/quality 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
18 
 
control (QA/QC) system and the emission reports have been verified by an independent auditing 
scheme, it is good practice to use such data. If extrapolation is needed to cover all copper production 
in the country either the implied emission factors for the facilities that did report, or the emission 
factors as provided above could be used. 
No generally accepted emission models are available for the copper industry. Such models could be 
developed, however, and used in national inventories. If this happens, it is good practice to compare 
the results of the model with a Tier 1 or Tier 2 estimate to assess the credibility of the model. If the 
model provides implied emission factors that lie outside the 95 % confidence intervals indicated in 
the tables above, it is good practice to include an explanation for this in the documentation with the 
inventory and preferably reflected in the Informative Inventory Report. 
3.4.3 Activity data 
Since PRTRs generally do not report activity data, such data in relation to the reported facility level 
emissions are sometimes difficult to find. A possible source of facility level-activity might be the 
registries of emission trading systems.  
In many countries national statistics offices collect production data on facility level but these are in 
many cases confidential. However, in several countries, national statistics offices are part of the 
national emission inventory systems and the extrapolation, if needed, could be performed at the 
statistics office, ensuring that confidentiality of production data is maintained. 
4 Data quality 
4.1 
Completeness 
Care must be taken to include all emissions, from combustion and processes. It is good practice to 
check, whether the emissions, reported as ‘included elsewhere’ (IE) under chapter 2.C.7.a are indeed 
included in the emission reported under combustion in chapter 1.A.2.b. 
4.2 
Avoiding double counting with other sectors 
Care must be taken that the emissions are not double counted in processes and combustion. It is 
good practice to check that the emissions reported under chapter 2.C.7.a are not included in the 
emission reported under combustion in chapter 1.A.2.b. 
 
 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
19 
 
4.3 
Verification 
4.3.1 Best Available Technique emission factors 
Table 4.1 provides some typical dust concentrations for processes in best available technique (BAT)-
associated facilities.  
Table 4.2 provides some typical concentrations for SOx, dioxins and TVOC in best available technique 
(BAT)-associated facilities. More information is provided in the revised BREF document for the non-
ferrous metal industry (European Commission, 2014). 
 
Table 4.1 
BAT-associated dust emission factors for source category 2.C.7.a Copper 
production 
BAT compliant emission factors 
  
Code 
Name 
NFR Source Category 
2.C.5.a 
Copper production 
Fuel 
N/A 
not applicable 
Pollutant 
 
Dust 
Process 
Value 
Unit 
95% confidence interval 
Lower 
Upper 
Storage, handling and transport of 
raw materials 
2 - 5 
mg/Nm3 
  
  
Concentrate drying 
3 - 5 
mg/Nm3 
  
  
Primary copper smelter and 
converter 
2 - 5 
mg/Nm3 
  
  
Secondary copper smelter and 
converter 
2 - 4 
mg/Nm3 
  
  
Anode furnace 
2 - 5 
mg/Nm3 
 
 
Anode casting 
<5 - 15 
mg/Nm3 
 
 
 
 
Table 4.2 
BAT-associated emission factors for source category 2.C.7.a Copper production, 
primary fire refining and melting processes 
BAT compliant emission factors 
  
Code 
Name 
NFR Source Category 
2.C.5.a 
Copper production 
Fuel 
N/A 
not applicable 
Pollutant 
Value 
Unit 
95% confidence 
interval 
Lower 
Upper 
SOx 
<50-500 
mg/Nm3 
  
  
Dioxins 
≤0.1 
ng TEQ/Nm3 
  
  
TVOC 
3 - 30 
mg/Nm3 
  
  
 
 
 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
20 
 
4.4 
Developing a consistent time series and recalculation 
No specific issues. 
4.5 
Uncertainty assessment 
In relation to Section 3.3.3, the abatement efficiency is highly dependent on factors such as filter 
maintenance and operating conditions, absorption agents and filter materials. 
4.5.1 Emission factor uncertainties 
No specific issues. 
4.5.2 Activity data uncertainties 
No specific issues. 
4.6 
Inventory quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) 
No specific issues. 
4.7 
Gridding 
National emission estimates can be disaggregated on the basis of production, population or 
employment statistics. 
4.8 
Reporting and documentation 
No specific issues. 
5 Glossary 
AR production, technology 
The production rate within the source category, using s specific 
technology 
AR production, technology 
The production rate within the source category, using s specific 
technology 
ARproduction 
The activity rate for the copper production 
Combustion process 
with contact 
Is a process in which the hot flue gases from a combustion process are 
directly injected into the reactor where the chemistry and physics take 
place converting the raw materials into the product. Examples are 
 
Primary iron and steel 
 
Cement 
 
… 
E facility, pollutant 
The emission of the pollutant as reported by a facility 
E pollutant 
The emission of the specified pollutant 
E total, pollutant 
The total emission of a pollutant for all facilities within the source 
category 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
21 
 
EF country, pollutant 
A country specific emission factor 
EF pollutant 
The emission factor for the pollutant 
EF technology, abated 
The emission factor after implementation of the abatement 
EF technology, pollutant 
The emission factor for this technology and this pollutant 
EF technology, unabated 
The emission factor before implementation of the abatement 
ESP 
Electrostatic precipitator: dust emissions abatement equipment 
FF 
Fabric filters: dust emissions abatement equipment 
Penetration technology 
The fraction of production using a specific technology 
Production facility 
The production rate in a facility 
Production total 
The production rate in the source category 
ηabatement 
The abatement efficiency 
 
6 References 
Althaus, H.-J., 2003. Life Cycle Inventories of Metals. Ecoinvent database, (www.ecoinvent.ch) accessed 
23 July 2019. 
Barbour A.K., Castle J.F. and Woods S.E. 1978. Production of non-ferrous metals. In: Industrial Air 
Pollution Handbook. Parker, A. (ed.), Mc Graw-Hill Book Comp. Ltd., London. 
European Commission, 2001. Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control (IPPC), Reference Document 
on 
Best 
Available 
Techniques 
(BREF) 
in 
the 
Non-Ferrous 
Metal 
Industries, 
(https://eippcb.jrc.ec.europa.eu/reference/) accessed 23 July 2019. 
European Commission, 2013. Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control (IPPC). Draft Reference 
Document on Best Available Techniques for the Large Combustion Plants. Draft 1, June 2013, 
(https://eippcb.jrc.ec.europa.eu/reference/) accessed 23 July 2019. 
European Commission, 2014. Integrated Pollution Prevention and Control (IPPC). Final Draft Reference 
Document on Best Available Techniques for the Non-Ferrous Metals Industries. Draft October 2014, 
(https://eippcb.jrc.ec.europa.eu/reference/) accessed 23 July 2019. 
Nriagu, J.O. and Pacyna, J.M., 1988. ‘Quantitative assessment of worldwide contamination of air, 
water and soils by trace metals’. Nature, 333, 134–139. 
Pacyna, J., Van der Most, P., Hobson, M., Wieser, M., Müller, B., Duval, L., Spezzano, P., Lotz, T., 
Kakareka, S., 2002. Combustion and Industry Expert Panel workshop. European Joint Research Centre 
(JRC), Ispra.  
Theloke, J., Kummer, U., Nitter, S., Geftler, T. and Friedrich, R., 2008. Überarbeitung der 
Schwermetallkapitel im CORINAIR Guidebook zur Verbesserung der Emissionsinventare und der 
Berichterstattung im Rahmen der Genfer Luftreinhaltekonvention. Report for Umweltbundesamt, April 
2008. 

 
2.C.7.a Copper production 
 
 
EMEP/EEA air pollutant emission inventory guidebook 2019 
22 
 
UN ECE, 1994. State-of-the-art report on heavy metals emissions. UN Economic Commission for Europe, 
Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution, Task Force on Heavy Metals Emissions, 
Prague, Czech Republic. 
UNEP, 2005. PCDD/PCDF Toolkit 2005. United Nations Environmental Programme, Nairobi.  
US EPA, 1993. Locating and estimating air emission from sources of mercury and mercury compounds. 
US Environmental Protection Agency, EPA-454/R-93-023, Research Triangle Park, NC. 
US EPA, 1995. AP-42 CD-ROM. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle Park, NC. 
US EPA, 1998. AP 42 (5th edition), October 1998, Chapter 12. US Environmental Protection Agency. 
Available at: www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/ap42/ch12/index.html. [Accessed 9 July 2009]. 
US EPA, 2011. SPECIATE database version 4.3, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA). 
Available at: http://cfpub.epa.gov/si/speciate/. (accessed 5 June 2013). 
Visschedijk, A.J.H., Pacyna, J., Pulles, T., Zandveld, P. and Denier van der Gon, H., 2004. ‘Coordinated 
European Particulate Matter Emission Inventory Program (CEPMEIP)’, In: Dilara, P. et al. (eds.), 
Proceedings of the PM emission inventories scientific workshop, Lago Maggiore, Italy, 18 October 2004. 
EUR 21302 EN, JRC, pp 163–174. 
 
7 Point of enquiry 
Enquiries concerning this chapter should be directed to the relevant leader(s) of the Task Force on 
Emission Inventories and Projection’s expert panel on Combustion and Industry. Please refer to the 
TFEIP website (www.tfeip-secretariat.org) for the contact details of the current expert panel leaders. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1
Sarah Elbakri
From:
dcapjane
Sent:
Wednesday, April 20, 2022 4:40 PM
To:
James Pew
Subject:
Copper Smelter Emission data-my note to Chuck French
This message originated outside of Earthjustice. Please use caution before opening attachments or links. 
 
Jim, 
 
I am sending you for the record. 
Jane Williams 
Executive Director 
California Communities Against Toxics 
Rosamond, California 
661‐256‐2101 
 
Begin forwarded message: 
From: Jane Williams <dcapjane@aol.com> 
Date: April 11, 2022 at 12:25:33 PM PDT 
To: Chuck French <French.Chuck@epa.gov> 
Subject: Copper Smelter Emission data 
Chuck, 
 
Greetings!  I hope you had a good weekend. 
 
It appears that some data on copper smelters is missing in the record; would it be possible for us to have 
access to this data: 
 
1. All emissions data from the state of Arizona. 
2. All voluntary data from the sources. 
 
The Freeport smelter is the largest single point of lead emissions in the country according to their Toxic 
Release Inventory submissions, yet your data seems to tell a different story. This is why we are so 
interested in these data sets. 
 
Thank you for your kind response to this inquiry. 
 
Cordially, 
 
Jane Williams, chair 
Sierra Club 
National Clean Air Team 
Executive Director 

2
California Communities Against Toxics 
Rosamond, California 
661‐256‐2101 

 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL  
Catalyst for Improving the Environment    
Evaluation Report 
Improvements in Air Toxics 
Emissions Data Needed to Conduct 
Residual Risk Assessments 
 
 
Report No. 08-P-0020 
 
 
October 31, 2007 

Report Contributors: 
Jim Hatfield 
Michael Young 
 
 
 
 
 
Kevin Good 
Erica Hauck 
Geoff Pierce 
Abbreviations 
AFS 
Air Facility Subsystem 
CAA 
Clean Air Act 
CEMS 
Continuous Emissions Monitoring System 
CFR 
Code of Federal Regulations 
ECMC 
Emission Calculation Method Code  
EPA 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
GACT 
Generally Available Control Technology 
GAO 
Government Accountability Office 
HAP 
Hazardous Air Pollutant 
IDEA 
Integrated Data for Enforcement Analysis 
LDAR 
Leak Detection and Repair 
MACT 
Maximum Achievable Control Technology 
NEI 
National Emissions Inventory 
NESHAP 
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants  
OAQPS 
Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards 
OECA 
Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance 
OIG 
Office of Inspector General 
PAH 
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon 
POM 
Polycyclic Organic Matter 
TRI 
Toxics Release Inventory 
VOC 
Volatile Organic Compound 
Cover photos: Industries that represent the three MACT sources categories on which our 
review concentrated are shown. These include, clockwise from top left: 
an aluminum plant, a petroleum refinery, and a paper mill.  (All photos 
courtesy U.S. Department of Energy) 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
  08-P-0020  
Office of Inspector General 
October 31, 2007 
At a Glance 
Catalyst for Improving the Environment 
Why We Did This Review 
The 1990 Clean Air Act 
Amendments required the 
U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) to develop 
maximum achievable control 
technology (MACT) standards 
to reduce air toxics emissions 
from stationary sources.  In 
2004, EPA completed the last 
of its MACT standards. We 
conducted this evaluation to 
assess the effectiveness of 
those standards in reducing air 
toxics emissions. 
Background 
EPA has issued 96 MACT 
standards covering
174 different categories of 
industrial sources of air toxics. 
Now that the MACT standards 
have been issued, EPA must 
assess the public health risk
remaining after each MACT
standard is implemented.  If 
the risk from a MACT 
category is “unacceptable,”
EPA must promulgate 
additional regulations to
reduce air toxics emissions 
from that category.  Excess 
exposure to air toxics can 
increase one’s risk of 
developing cancer and other 
serious ailments.   
For further information,  
contact our Office of 
Congressional and Public 
Liaison at (202) 566-2391. 
To view the full report, 
click on the following link: 
www.epa.gov/oig/reports/2008/ 
20071031-08-P-0020.pdf 
Improvements in Air Toxics Emissions Data 
Needed to Conduct Residual Risk Assessments
 What We Found 
EPA’s National Emissions Inventory (NEI) data indicate an overall decline in air 
toxic emissions concurrent with implementation of the MACT standards.  
Although NEI data reliability is uncertain, it is reasonable to conclude that air 
toxics emissions have decreased.  Our work suggests that the MACT program has 
played a role in these reductions.    
EPA plans to use NEI data to assess the public health risk remaining from MACT 
sources’ air toxics emissions, but the reliability of NEI data for site-specific 
emissions varies considerably.  EPA has not established objectives to define an 
acceptable level of quality for NEI data used in the residual risk process.  EPA 
guidance recommends that program offices develop data quality objectives for 
using data in such decision-making processes.  Given the uncertainties associated 
with NEI data, EPA could over- or under-estimate public health risk from MACT 
sources’ emissions.  Overstating risk could result in EPA placing on industries 
regulations that are not cost beneficial.  Conversely, understating risk could result 
in EPA not requiring regulations where needed to protect public health.  
In our March 2004 report on EPA’s air toxics performance measures, we 
recommended that EPA require State reporting of air toxics emissions data.  EPA 
has not implemented this recommendation, citing unclear statutory authority and 
the belief that voluntary reporting can achieve this goal.  However, such a 
requirement could help EPA obtain more reliable and complete NEI data. 
In December 2006, EPA presented its plan for conducting residual risk 
assessments to EPA’s Science Advisory Board.  The Board’s June 2007 report 
recommended several actions to improve this process.  These recommendations 
included developing a framework for improving the NEI data and conducting an 
analysis to determine the impact of data uncertainty on the risk assessments.  In 
March 2007, EPA solicited public comment on the NEI and other data it plans to 
use for conducting residual risk assessments. 
What We Recommend 
We recommend that EPA develop data quality objectives for using NEI data in 
conducting residual risk assessments, and establish requirements for State 
reporting of air toxics emissions data and compliance monitoring information.  
EPA disagreed with our recommendations, but stated that it had activities 
underway to improve the NEI data.  However, EPA’s planned actions do not 
sufficiently address the problems identified, and we consider the issues unresolved. 

UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20460 
Signature of Wade T. Najjim - Assistant Inspector General for Program Evaluation
OFFICE OF 
INSPECTOR GENERAL 
October 31, 2007 
MEMORANDUM 
SUBJECT: 
Improvements in Air Toxics Emissions Data Needed to Conduct  
Residual Risk Assessments 
Report No. 08-P-0020 
FROM: 
Wade T. Najjum 
TO:
 
 
Robert J. Meyers 
 
 
 
Principal Deputy Assistant Administrator for Air and Radiation 
This is our report on the subject evaluation conducted by the Office of Inspector General (OIG) 
of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).  This report contains findings that describe 
the problems the OIG has identified and the corrective actions the OIG recommends.  This report 
represents the opinion of the OIG and does not necessarily represent the final EPA position.  
Final determinations on matters in this report will be made by EPA managers in accordance with 
established audit resolution procedures. 
The estimated cost of this report – calculated by multiplying the project’s staff days by the 
applicable daily full cost billing rates in effect at the time – is $1,288,566. 
Action Required 
In accordance with EPA Manual 2750, you are required to provide a written response to this 
report within 90 calendar days. You should include a corrective action plan for agreed upon 
action, including milestones.  This report will be available at http://www.epa.gov/oig. 
If you or your staff have any questions regarding this report, please contact me at (202) 566-0827 
or najjum.wade@epa.gov; or Rick Beusse, Product Line Director, at (919) 541-5747 or 
beusse.rick@epa.gov. 

Improvements in Air Toxics Emissions Data Needed to Conduct  
Residual Risk Assessments  
Table of Contents 
Chapters 
1  
Introduction .....................................................................................................
 1  
Purpose ....................................................................................................
 1  
Background ..............................................................................................
 1  
Noteworthy Achievements........................................................................
 6  
Scope and Methodology...........................................................................
 6  
2  
EPA Inventory Data Show General Decrease in Air Toxics Emissions .....
 7  
Available Data Has Limitations.................................................................
 7  
NEI Data Suggest Air Toxics Emissions Have Decreased  
Air Toxics Ambient Monitoring Data Indicate  
External Factors and Changes in Emissions Estimation  
EPA and Some State Compliance Monitoring Activities  
Key Compliance Monitoring Information Lacking 
     Since MACT Program Implemented....................................................
 7  
     General Reduction in Emissions .........................................................  13  
Methods Impact Air Toxics Emissions Reported.................................  13  
     Should Result in Emissions Reductions..............................................  14  
     to Evaluate MACT Effectiveness ........................................................  14  
Conclusions..............................................................................................  16  
Agency Comments and OIG Evaluation..................................................... 16  
3  
Air Toxics Inventory Data Need to Be Improved   
Before Being Used in Residual Risk Assessments .....................................  17  
Reliability of NEI Data is Uncertain...........................................................  17  
EPA and Other Studies Have Noted Uncertainties   
with Air Toxics Data.............................................................................  19 
Data Quality Objectives Have Not Been Established...............................  20 
No Reporting Requirement for Air Toxics Emissions Data.......................  21  
Use of NEI Inventory Data Could Result in  
     Unreliable Residual Risk Assessments...............................................  22  
Conclusions..............................................................................................  23  
Recommendations ...................................................................................  23  
Agency Comments and OIG Evaluation..................................................... 23  
Status of Recommendations and Potential Monetary Benefits...........................  26  
- continued 
i 

Improvements in Air Toxics Emissions Data Needed to Conduct  
Residual Risk Assessments  
Appendices 
A 
Details on Scope and Methodology...............................................................  27 
B 
Amount and Percent of Change in NEI Air Toxics Emissions 
Between 1990 and 2002 ..................................................................................  32 
C 
NEI Emissions Reductions Compared to  
Federal Register Anticipated Reductions .....................................................  35 
D 
Detailed Results – Petroleum Refinery MACT ..............................................  37 
E 
Detailed Results – Primary Aluminum MACT ...............................................  45 
F 
Detailed Results – Pulp and Paper MACT.....................................................  52 
G 
MACT Compliance Monitoring, Enforcement, and  
Compliance Assistance Activities.................................................................  57 
H 
Compliance Assistance Tools Developed by EPA 
for Three Sample MACTs................................................................................  61 
I 
Agency Response to the Draft Report ..........................................................  63 
J 
Distribution ......................................................................................................  66 
ii 

Chapter 1
Introduction 
Purpose 
The 1990 Amendments to the Clean Air Act (CAA) required the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to develop and issue maximum 
achievable control technology (MACT) standards to reduce emissions of air 
toxics from certain categories of stationary sources.  EPA issued the last of its 
MACT standards in 2004. EPA anticipates that when fully implemented in 2007, 
MACT standards will reduce air toxics emissions from stationary sources by 
1.7 million tons per year.  We conducted this evaluation to assess the progress of 
MACT standards in reducing air toxics emissions. Specifically, we sought to 
determine: 
1. To what extent MACT standards have reduced emissions of air toxics and 
achieved the emission reductions anticipated when the rules were developed? 
2. What factors are associated with the effectiveness of MACT standards in 
achieving emission reductions, including: 
• What factors external to MACT standards have impacted changes in 
emissions? 
• Is there a relationship between the quantity and quality of compliance 
monitoring and enforcement and the effectiveness of MACT standards in 
achieving the desired emissions reductions?   
• Is there a relationship between the adequacy of compliance assistance 
tools and the effectiveness of MACT standards in achieving the desired 
emissions reductions?   
Background 
Toxic air pollutants are those pollutants known or suspected to cause cancer or 
other serious health effects.  The 1990 CAA Amendments established a list of 189 
air toxics that EPA is required to control.  Since 1990, EPA has revised the list 
slightly and currently regulates 187 air toxics.  These pollutants are also referred 
to as hazardous air pollutants (HAPs).  Congress selected these toxic air pollutants 
on the basis of potential health and/or environmental hazard.  
EPA’s latest National Air Toxics Assessment estimated that in 1999 more than 
270 million people lived in U.S. census tracts where the combined upper bound 
lifetime cancer risk from air toxics exceeded 10 in 1,000,000.  People who live 
1 

near certain major industrial plants may face even higher cancer risks from air 
toxics. The following table shows the sources of air toxics emissions: 
Table 1.1: Sources of Air Toxics Emissions 
Source 
Description 
Large 
Stationary 
or Major 
Any building, structure, facility, or installation that emits or may emit any air pollutant.  
Large or major stationary sources are those that emit 10 tons or more per year of any 
of the listed toxic air pollutants, or 25 tons or more per year of a combination of air 
toxics.   
Area 
Stationary sources that emit less than 10 tons per year of a single air toxic, or less 
than 25 tons per year of a combination of air toxics.  While emissions from individual 
area sources are often relatively small, collectively their emissions can be of concern, 
particularly where large numbers of sources are located in heavily populated areas.  
Mobile 
Includes cars and light trucks, heavy trucks and buses, nonroad recreational vehicles 
(such as dirt bikes and snowmobiles), farm and construction machines, lawn and 
garden equipment, marine engines, aircraft, and locomotives.  
Source: Developed by Office of Inspector General (OIG) staff based on information from EPA 
According to the most recent National Air Toxics Assessment, major stationary 
sources, which are the principal sources regulated by the MACT program, 
account for approximately 11 percent of the average national cancer risk from 
exposure to air toxics. Examples of toxic air pollutants include benzene, which is 
emitted from petroleum refineries and other sources; hydrogen fluoride, which is 
emitted from primary aluminum facilities and other sources; and formaldehyde,1 
which is emitted from pulp and paper mills as well as petroleum refineries and 
other sources. 
MACT Is First of Two Phases to Reduce Air Toxics Risks 
To control air toxics emissions from major stationary sources, the CAA requires a 
two-phased approach. The first phase requires EPA to develop emission 
standards, referred to as MACT standards, for sources that emit the air toxics 
identified in the CAA.  To identify those sources requiring emission standards, the 
CAA requires EPA to list the categories of major and area stationary sources of 
air toxics emissions.  In 1992, EPA published the initial list of air toxics source 
categories requiring emissions standards.  This list included both major and area 
source categories, but the majority were major source categories.2  Based on that 
initial list and subsequent revisions, EPA has promulgated 96 MACT standards 
covering 174 different source categories. The second phase is commonly referred 
to as the residual risk and technology review program.  This phase requires EPA 
to assess the public health risk remaining after implementation of the MACT 
1 EPA staff informed us that in the last 3-4 years the toxicity risk for formaldehyde has been lowered, and is no 
longer considered a key HAP. However, controversy remains over this action. 
  EPA has identified additional categories of area sources that present health risks in urban areas, as required by the 
CAA, that were not included in this initial list.  On November 22, 2002, EPA issued the final list of 70 source 
categories for regulation under the area source program as required under CAA sections 112(c)(3) and 
112(k)(3)(B)(ii).  EPA is under court order to complete regulations for these area source categories.  
2 
2

standards for both major and area sources.3  This second phase also requires that 
EPA review the technology-basis of the major and area source standards for 
advancement in technology and develop additional standards if needed.  Table 1.2 
describes the two phases and their implementation status as of August 2007.   
Table 1.2: Two Phases for Reducing Air Toxics Emissions and Risks from Stationary Sources 
Description 
Status 
Phase 1 
EPA was required to set technology-based MACT 
standards for major sources of air toxics.  These 
standards were to reflect, at a minimum, the level of 
emissions that the best performing 12 percent of 
sources in the category were achieving in practice.   
EPA was also required to set technology-based 
standards for area sources.  These could be either 
MACT (setting standards as least as stringent as the 
best performing 12 percent) or could be based on 
generally available control technology (GACT). 
EPA promulgated the last of 
its 96 MACT standards in 
September 2004.   
EPA promulgated 27 GACT 
standards as of July 2007 
Phase 2 
EPA must promulgate stricter standards if the original 
MACT standard is not sufficiently protective of human 
health.  These standards are referred to as residual 
risk standards, since they address the remaining or 
residual risk after implementation of the original 
MACT.  Section 112 requires these stricter standards 
if the MACT standard has not reduced excess lifetime 
cancer risk to the most exposed individual to less 
than one in 1,000,000. The CAA requires that EPA 
establish these standards within 8 years after 
promulgation of the MACT. 
In addition, section 112 requires EPA to review, and if 
necessary, revise both MACT and GACT standards 
for both major and area sources considering 
advancements in control technologies.  The CAA 
requires that EPA conduct these technology reviews 
every 8 years after promulgation of the MACT/GACT 
standards. 
Ongoing.  As of June 2007, 
EPA had completed eight 
residual risk and technology 
review standards and had 
proposed risk and 
technology review standards 
for petroleum refining in 
September 2007. EPA has 
begun a new streamlined 
process for developing 
standards, called Risk and 
Technology Review.  EPA 
expects to propose six 
additional standards by the 
end of the calendar year 
Source: Developed by OIG staff based on information from EPA 
MACT standards generally establish emission limits for the air toxics of concern 
emitted from the covered sources.  These limits are based on the emission 
reductions achieved by the highest performing sources in that source category.  
However, not all MACT standards include emission limits.  The MACT standards 
for different source categories can vary greatly in the number and complexity of 
requirements.  Regardless of the standard’s specific requirements, each MACT 
has an effective date of compliance by which all covered facilities must comply 
3 These residual risk assessments are not required where EPA set a generally available control technology standard 
instead of a MACT standard for area sources, as provided by CAA section 112(d)(5). 
3 

with the MACT’s requirements.  By the end of 2007, all 96 MACT standards 
would have reached their effective date of compliance.4 
Eight years after each MACT standard is promulgated, EPA is required to assess 
the public health risks remaining from that source category’s air toxics emissions.  
The CAA stipulates that EPA must consider the excess lifetime cancer risks to the 
individual most exposed to HAP emissions from a facility in a specific source 
category. If, after implementation, EPA finds that a MACT standard is not 
sufficiently protective of health, the Agency must issue additional standards that 
provide an “ample margin of safety” to protect public health. 
EPA’s approach to determine whether a MACT standard is sufficiently protective 
of health considers risk and other factors.  A lifetime cancer risk of greater than 
1 in 1,000,000 is considered a trigger point requiring more detailed analysis to 
determine whether additional reductions are required to provide an “ample margin 
of safety.” EPA considers cost, technical feasibility, and other factors in deciding 
whether a risk greater than 1 in 1,000,000 provides an ample margin of safety.  
However, a risk greater than 1 in 10,000 is generally considered as not providing 
an ample margin of safety and would require EPA actions to reduce that risk.   
Table 1.3 shows EPA’s decision approach to conducting residual risk 
assessments: 
Table 1.3:  Decision Making Process for Residual Risk 
Maximum Individual Risk = 
1 in 1,000,000 or Less 
Maximum Individual Risk = 
Between 1 in 1,000,000 and 
1 in 10,000 
Maximum Individual Risk = 
1 in 10,000 or Greater 
“Ample margin of safety” is 
met. No additional action is 
needed. 
Costs, technical feasibility, and 
other factors are considered in 
determining whether additional 
actions are required. 
Standard is generally not 
considered sufficiently 
protective of public health, 
and additional actions are 
needed to reduce risk. 
Source: Developed by OIG staff based on information from EPA 
EPA is behind in conducting residual risk reviews.  In addition, EPA is behind in 
conducting technology reviews, required every 8 years after promulgation of 
MACT and GACT standards for both major and area sources.  The Government 
Accountability Office (GAO) recently found5 that because EPA issued most of 
the MACT standards behind schedule, the residual risk reviews “have been 
pushed back commensurately, thereby delaying any additional public health 
protection that these reviews may provide.”  As of June 2007, EPA had completed 
eight residual risk standards. These standards cover 14 of the 174 MACT source 
categories for which EPA is required to make a residual risk determination. 
  Three EPA MACT standards were vacated by court decisions.  As a result of these court decisions, it is now 
incumbent upon the States to develop emission standards for these three categories and incorporate these standards 
and compliance dates into State-issued operating permits for the applicable facilities.  
5 EPA Should Improve the Management of its Air Toxics Program, Report No. GAO-06-669, June 26, 2006. 
4 
4

Given resource constraints and pending court orders to complete residual risk 
reviews, EPA has begun a streamlined approach to analyze risks from large groups 
of source categories at once.  In addition, EPA is combining the residual risk reviews 
with technology reviews for each MACT standard.  This combined, streamlined 
approach is referred to as Risk and Technology Review.  This approach is discussed 
in more detail in Chapter 3. 
State and Local Agency Roles in MACT Implementation 
Although EPA developed the MACT standards, EPA has generally delegated 
implementation of the standards to the States.  Implementation activities include: 
• Incorporating the standards into facility operating permits. 
• Providing compliance assistance to regulated facilities. 
• Maintaining required records. 
• Monitoring compliance. 
• Taking enforcement actions against facilities that violate the standard.   
Once a standard has been delegated, the State becomes the primary agency for 
implementation.  However, this delegation does not prohibit EPA from enforcing 
any applicable emission standard or requirement of the MACT. 
Three types of activities considered crucial to successful implementation of the 
MACT standards are compliance assistance, compliance monitoring, and 
enforcement actions. 
• 
Compliance assistance is help provided by regulatory agencies to enhance 
a facility’s understanding of the regulation and increase compliance.  
Examples include training sessions and workshops, plain language guides, 
compliance checklists, and applicability flowcharts. 
• 
Compliance monitoring consists of activities conducted by regulatory 
agencies to determine whether a facility is complying with environmental 
regulations. These activities include full or partial compliance evaluations 
conducted by qualified inspectors, and review of information submitted by 
the facility, such as monitoring reports.  A full compliance evaluation 
includes: 
o 
A review of all required reports and the underlying records. 
o 
An assessment of air pollution control devices and operating 
conditions. 
o 
Observing visible emissions, as appropriate. 
o 
A review of facility records and operating logs. 
o 
An assessment of process parameters, such as feed rates, raw 
material compositions, and process rates. 
o 
A stack test if there is no other way to determine compliance with 
the emission limits. 
5 

• 
Enforcement Actions consist of actions taken to compel compliance with 
an environmental statute (such as the CAA), Federal rules and regulations, 
or federally-enforceable State rules and regulations.  Enforcement actions 
may consist of civil or criminal judicial enforcement proceedings taken as 
a result of an identified violation. 
Noteworthy Achievements 
To improve its use in measuring air toxics trends and progress, as well as improve 
its use for air quality modeling, EPA conducted an extensive revision of the 1990 
National Toxics Inventory baseline.  The original baseline was comprised of 
county-level data, but EPA revised the baseline when it created the 1990 National 
Emissions Inventory (NEI) for air toxics, including providing individual facility 
point source data. EPA has made other changes to improve the 1990 NEI 
baseline, including adding missing MACT source categories and updating 
selected non-point emission estimates and emissions allocation procedures. 
Scope and Methodology 
We conducted our field work from August 2005 to June 2007 at the EPA Office 
of Air and Radiation’s Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards (OAQPS) in 
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina; and the EPA Office of Enforcement and 
Compliance Assurance (OECA) in Washington, DC.  We also interviewed 
managers and collected data from five EPA regions, seven State agencies, and 
nine MACT-regulated facilities. 
We selected three MACT source categories for in-depth analysis from the 
universe of MACTs with compliance dates prior to 2002.  These three were the 
Petroleum Refinery MACT, the Primary Aluminum MACT, and the Pulp and 
Paper MACT I & III. For these three MACT categories, we compared 1990 and 
2002 NEI emissions of the specific air toxics targeted by the MACT standard.  To 
address the factors associated with the effectiveness of the MACT standards in 
achieving emission reductions, we selected three facilities from each of the three 
MACT categories above for additional analyses.  We selected these nine facilities 
based on emissions of certain pollutants of concern contained in the 2002 NEI 
Version 1. 
We conducted this program evaluation in accordance with generally accepted 
government auditing standards.  Those standards require that we plan and perform 
the evaluation to obtain sufficient, appropriate evidence to provide a reasonable 
basis for our findings and conclusions based on our evaluation objectives.  We 
believe that the evidence obtained provides a reasonable basis for our findings and 
conclusions based on our evaluation objectives. 
Appendix A describes our scope and methodology in more detail, including 
information on prior reports, data limitations, and management control review. 
6 

Chapter 2
EPA Inventory Data Show General Decrease 
in Air Toxics Emissions 
EPA data indicate an overall decline in air toxic emissions concurrent with the 
implementation of the MACT standards.  Several factors may have contributed to 
this decline.  These include the requirements of the MACT standards as well as 
external factors, such as industry trends or other CAA regulations.  Some of the 
decline could also be due to changes in emission calculation methodologies rather 
than actual changes in emissions.  Based on the data available, we were unable to 
determine the extent to which MACT standards caused emission reductions.   
Available Data Has Limitations 
While we believe EPA’s data can be used to conclude that air toxics emissions are 
generally declining, we do not attest to the accuracy of the specific emission totals 
presented in our analyses. EPA’s air toxics emission inventory is based on 
emission estimates developed using methodologies that have varying degrees of 
reliability. Emissions data obtained from continuous emissions monitoring or 
source-specific emission tests are generally the preferred method for estimating a 
source’s emissions.  Other estimation methodologies, such as emissions factors, 
are less reliable than source monitoring. 
EPA has not quantified the uncertainty associated with the various estimation 
methodologies used to compile the air toxics emissions inventory.  Further, the 
methodology used to develop facility-specific emission estimates can change over 
time, resulting in a reported emission reduction being the result of changed 
methodology rather than an actual decrease in emissions. Chapter 3 discusses the 
uncertainties and limitations of EPA’s air toxics inventory data, and EPA’s plans 
to use this data to conduct residual risk assessments.  
NEI Data Suggest Air Toxics Emissions Have Decreased 
Since MACT Program Implemented 
We conducted a number of analyses comparing 1990 and 2002 NEI emissions.  
Based on our analysis of NEI data pertaining only to MACT standards, we 
determined that from 1990 to 2002: 
• Total air toxics emissions from stationary sources declined by 
approximately 1.7 million tons. 
• Emissions of the six air toxics designated by EPA as presenting the 
highest cancer risk nationwide have declined. 
7 

• Overall air toxics emissions declined for the 27 MACTs with compliance 
dates prior to 2002. Further, the percentage reductions in emissions for 
16 of these 27 MACTs met or exceeded the percentage reductions 
anticipated by EPA when it developed the standards. 
• Emissions of the primary air toxics targeted by the petroleum refinery, 
primary aluminum, and pulp and paper MACTs declined by 93 percent, Figure 2.1: Air Toxics Emissions Assigned to a MACT Code, 1990 - 2002
Emissions (in tons) 
37 percent, and 90 percent, respectively. 
These downward trends suggest that the MACT standards have helped to reduce 
air toxics emissions.  Based on our interviews with EPA staff, State 
environmental staff and managers, and industry representatives, other factors also 
played a role in reducing air toxics emissions.  These other factors, which include 
decreases in production and air rules other than the MACT standards, are  
discussed later in this chapter.  Details on the emissions trends we analyzed 
follow. 
NEI Overall Air Toxics Emissions Declined Between 1990 and 2002 
According to the NEI, total air toxics emissions from stationary sources (both 
major and area) assigned to a MACT category declined by approximately 
1.7 million tons, or 70 percent.  In computing the total emissions for any given 
MACT category, we only included emissions of specific air toxics or air toxic 
categories reported in both 1990 and 2002 for that MACT code.  Figure 2.1 
illustrates the change. 
Figure 2.1: Air Toxics Emissions Assigned to a MACT Code, 1990 – 2002 
2,500,000 
2,000,000 
1,500,000 
1,000,000 
500,000 
0 
1990 
2002 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI data 
Appendix B presents the results of our analysis for each MACT category. 
8 

NEI Emissions of Key Air Toxics Declined Between 1990 and 2002 
EPA’s OAQPS had identified six key air toxics, listed in Table 2.1, that present 
the highest average cancer and non-cancer risks to the public nationwide.  The 
key air toxics are a subset of the 33 Urban Air Toxics and reflect air toxics posing 
high public health risks. 
We compared emissions of these six key air toxics for the 27 MACT standards 
with compliance dates prior to 2002.  This comparison indicated that emissions of 
the six key air toxics decreased by significant percentages.  Aggregate emissions 
of the key air toxics from these source categories declined by 83 percent over this 
period. Table 2.1 shows the emissions changes for the six key pollutants.  
Table 2.1: Emissions of Key Air Toxics from 1990 to 2002 for MACTs  
with Compliance Dates Prior to 2002 
Key Pollutant 
1990 NEI 
Emissions 
(Tons per year) 
2002 NEI 
Emissions 
(Tons per year) 
Change
 (2002-1990) 
(Tons per year) 
(%) 
Change 
Acrolein 
822.8 
100.1 
-722.7 
-88% 
Arsenica 
40.9 
5.2 
-35.7 
-87% 
Benzene 
35,301.5 
10,083.4 
-25,218.2 
-71% 
1,3-Butadiene 
14,891.7 
606.1 
-14,285.6 
-96% 
Chromium VIb 
251.6 
32.4 
-219.1 
-87% 
Formaldehydec 
17,268.4 
1,102.5 
-16,165.9 
-94% 
Totals d 
68,577.0 
11,929.8 
-56,647.2 
-83% 
a = Total includes all arsenic compounds. 
b = Total includes all chromium compounds. Chromium VI is a subset of this total. 
c = There is currently a great degree of uncertainty as to the cancer risk posed from inhalation of formaldehyde.  
OAQPS is currently supporting a cancer potency that would indicate the cancer risks from formaldehyde are 
not expected to be one of the “key air toxics” as noted above.  EPA continues to study the effects of this 
pollutant and is expecting a resolution on this uncertainty in the near future. 
d = Totals may not equal due to rounding. 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from the NEI databases 
NEI Air Toxics Emissions Declined for MACTs with 
Compliance Dates Prior to 2002 
For each of the 27 MACTs with compliance dates prior to 2002, we compared 
emissions reductions as indicated by the NEI to the emissions reductions 
anticipated when the MACT standard was developed.  The 2002 inventory should 
represent emissions after the MACT requirements went into effect for these 
MACTs. For these 27 MACTs, the NEI data show a decline in air toxics 
emissions of over 1.5 million tons from 1990 to 2002, or 85 percent, for those 
pollutants recorded in both years’ inventories.  Further, 16 of these 27 MACTs 
achieved the emissions reductions that EPA anticipated when the standard was 
developed. 
When developing the MACT standards, EPA normally estimated the emission 
reductions expected to occur as a result of the MACT.  The anticipated 
reductions, along with the baseline emissions for that MACT category, were 
9 

generally published in the Federal Register notice or supporting documents for the 
rule. Table 2.2 presents the results of our review, while Appendix C provides a 
detailed comparison for each of these 27 MACT standards. 
Table 2.2: Status of Anticipated Emissions Reduction Achievement for MACTs with 
Compliance Dates Prior to 2002 
Status of Anticipated 
Reduction Achievement 
No. of 
MACT 
Standards 
Percent of 
MACT 
Standards 
Anticipated Reductions Achieved 
16 
59% 
Anticipated Reductions Not Achieved 
6 
22% 
Unable to Determine if Anticipated Reductions Achieved 
5 
19% 
Total 
27 
100.0% 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI databases 
NEI Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics Declined for Three Sample 
MACTs between 1990 and 2002 
We selected the following three MACT standards for a more in-depth analysis of 
emissions changes: 
• Petroleum Refinery MACT (Subpart CC),  
• Primary Aluminum MACT (Subpart LL), and  
• Pulp and Paper MACT I & III (Subpart S). 
NEI data indicated that emissions from two of these three MACT categories have 
declined since implementation of the MACT standard.  However, EPA has not yet 
conducted technology reviews or residual risk assessments for these three 
MACTs. The residual risk assessments will determine whether the MACT 
standards are sufficiently protective of public health.  For each of the three 
MACTs, we reviewed changes in emissions of those air toxics specifically 
targeted by the MACT standard. The results of our analyses follow. 
NEI-Reported Emissions for Petroleum Refineries Declined Significantly.  
NEI data show a significant decline in emissions from the petroleum refinery 
sector. Industry representatives and EPA staff attributed this decline to the 
numerous CAA regulations, in addition to the MACT, applicable to this 
industry. OECA staff also told us that the new source review enforcement 
initiative resulted in decreased emissions for this industry sector.   
The NEI data indicated that total air toxics emissions decreased by over 
90,000 tons, or 91 percent, from 1990 to 2002.  This exceeded the 59 percent 
reduction EPA anticipated when the rule was developed.  Further, the NEI 
data indicated that emissions of the primary pollutants targeted by the MACT 
also declined. Figure 2.2 depicts the emissions of targeted pollutants between 
1990 and 2002. Appendix D provides more information on the Petroleum 
Refinery MACT. 
10 

  Figure 2.2:  Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for Petroleum Refinery MACT, 1990-2002 
Fi
gure 2
.2: Emm
issions
 of Tar
geted A
ir soxics for Pet
roleum 
Refinery MACT, 1990 - 2
002
NEI Emissions of Pollutants of Most Concern from Primary Aluminum 
Production Have Declined. The NEI data indicated that total air toxics 
emissions increased for the primary aluminum sector because of increases in 
emissions of carbonyl sulfide.  However, emissions of polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (specifically PAH-7 and PAH-15) and hydrogen fluoride, which 
EPA considers the pollutants of most concern from primary aluminum 
facilities, all declined.  According to the NEI, total emissions of these three air 
toxics declined by 37.4 percent from 1990 to 2002, which did not meet the 
50-percent reduction anticipated when the MACT was developed.  OAQPS 
told us that based on industry comments received in response to its Advance 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, it plans to revise the 2002 NEI emission 
estimates for this sector.  Figure 2.3 depicts the emissions of targeted 
pollutants between 1990 and 2002. Appendix E provides more information on 
the Primary Aluminum MACT. 
11 

 
Figure 2.3: Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for the Primary Aluminum MACT 
Fi
gure
 2.3: 
Emissi
ons of
 Targe
ted Air soxics fo
r the Primary Aluminum MAC
T 
NEI Emissions from Pulp and Paper Have Declined.  The NEI data 
indicated that total air toxics emissions decreased by 192,197 tons, or 
90 percent. This overall reduction of 90 percent exceeded the 58 percent 
reduction EPA anticipated when the MACT standard was developed.  Further, 
the data indicate that emissions of the primary pollutants targeted by the 
MACT also declined. For example, emissions of formaldehyde, which is a 
pollutant of concern from pulp and paper mills, declined from 4,124 tons in 
1990 to 196 tons in 2002. The following figure depicts the emissions of 
targeted pollutants between 1990 and 2002. Appendix F provides more 
information on the Pulp and Paper MACT.  
  Figure 2.4: Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for the Pulp and Paper MACT, 1990 - 2002 
Fi
gure 2.
4: Emis
sions o
f Targe
ted Air 
Toxics f
or the P
ulp and 
Paper MACT, 1990
 - 2002 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI databases. 
12 

Air Toxics Ambient Monitoring Data Indicate General Reduction in 
Emissions 
Trends in ambient air concentrations can be indicative of trends in air toxics 
emissions.  ERG6 conducted a study, Evaluating HAP Trends: A Look at 
Emissions, Concentrations, and Regulation Analyses for Selected Metropolitan 
Statistical Areas, to identify trends in air toxics emissions and ambient 
concentrations in selected metropolitan areas.  This study’s results suggest a 
decline in air toxics7 concurrent with the implementation of the MACT standards.   
The study’s objectives included determining whether air toxics-specific Federal 
regulations have been effective at reducing ambient concentrations of air toxics, 
and whether air toxics emissions show a decline due to air toxics-specific Federal 
regulations. The study focused on trends for 9 specific air toxics in 
10 metropolitan areas.  ERG concluded that ambient concentrations generally 
declined between 1992 and 2003; during this same period, EPA issued 64 air 
toxics-specific regulations. The study also noted that air toxics emissions 
decreased substantially between 1990 and 2002; during that period, EPA 
implemented over 40 air toxics-specific regulations.  The study’s authors noted 
that their analysis was based on the unrevised 1990 NEI and draft 2002 NEI.  Our 
analysis, which was based on the revised 1990 NEI and a later version of the 2002 
NEI, showed similar trends.  
External Factors and Changes in Emissions Estimation Methods 
Impact Air Toxics Emissions Reported 
Factors external to the MACT standards can cause reductions in air toxics 
emissions.  For example, a decline in production for a particular industry can 
result in reduced emissions, regardless of the MACT requirements.  While it 
varies by industry and facility, implementation of some National Ambient Air 
Quality Standards regulations often produces a co-benefit of reducing some air 
toxics. Similarly, State or local air toxics regulations that are more stringent than 
Federal MACTs may be responsible for some air toxics emission reductions.  
Further, changes in emissions factors or other estimation methods have impacted 
reported emissions for some source categories.  Representatives from six of the 
eight facilities we contacted said that improved emissions factors and/or increased 
emissions monitoring8 have led to more accurate estimates of emissions than in 
the past.  Because reported emissions are often based on emissions factors, 
6 ERG is a multidisciplinary consulting firm that offers a broad range of services, including environmental services.  
While EPA is one of ERG’s clients, this study was self-initiated and not requested or funded by EPA.
7  Study results presented October 2006 at the Air and Waste Management Association’s Environmental Data 
Analysis Workshop in Chicago, Illinois. 
8  Of the three MACTs we reviewed in-depth, only the Primary Aluminum MACT required emissions monitoring of 
air toxics.  The other two MACTs required monitoring of processes or surrogate pollutants to determine compliance 
with the MACT standard.  
13 

changes in these factors over time may make it appear that actual emissions have 
increased or decreased, when in fact it is the estimation methods that have 
changed. OECA managers and staff told us that a general lack of monitoring 
requirements for the MACT program impedes their ability to analyze emissions 
trends and assess the likelihood of potential MACT violations. 
Further details on external factors changes in emission estimation techniques for 
the three MACT standards on which we focused are in Appendices D, E, and F. 
EPA and Some State Compliance Monitoring Activities Should Result 
in Emissions Reductions 
While data were not available to assess the overall effectiveness of compliance 
monitoring activities, the results of specific EPA compliance monitoring 
initiatives and one State initiative have disclosed significant noncompliance with 
some MACT standards.  Corrective actions to bring the sources into compliance 
with the MACT should result in reduced air toxics emissions.  For example, EPA 
estimates that its MACT-related enforcement actions for Fiscal Years 2005 and 
2006 will result in a projected 332,000 and 356,000 pounds of air toxics 
reductions, respectively, once the sources come into compliance with the MACT.   
We were not able to identify any specific impact on emission reductions from 
compliance assistance activities (e.g., guidance documents, training workshops, 
etc.). However, the State and industry representatives we talked with told us that 
EPA’s compliance assistance activities and tools were generally useful.  See 
Appendices G and H for more information on compliance monitoring and 
assistance activities conducted by EPA.   
Key Compliance Monitoring Information Lacking to Evaluate 
MACT Effectiveness 
Sufficient data on all MACT-related compliance monitoring and assistance 
activities were not available to quantitatively determine the impact of these 
activities on air toxics emissions.  EPA’s database for recording MACT-related 
compliance monitoring activities, generally known as the Air Facility Subsystem 
(AFS), lacked essential program information needed to conduct such analyses.  
We noted the following limitations: 
• AFS did not identify the specific MACT subpart applicable to a facility. 
• AFS did not indicate the pollutants analyzed during stack tests to measure 
the amount of a specific pollutant or pollutants being emitted through the 
stacks at a facility. 
• AFS did not indicate the specific CAA regulations assessed during partial 
compliance evaluations.  
• Some States did not submit required information to AFS. 
14 

In some instances, these data elements were not included because EPA policy did 
not require States to submit this data.  In other instances, incompatibility between 
State data systems and AFS hampered reporting.  The absence of key compliance 
monitoring information hinders EPA’s ability to assess MACT program 
performance and properly oversee State compliance monitoring efforts.  
AFS is the primary source of compliance data for facilities regulated by the CAA, 
including MACT sources. AFS is comprised of the minimum data requirements 
that State and local agencies are required to submit for CAA-regulated facilities, 
such as compliance monitoring activities and enforcement actions.  AFS supplies 
all of the air data to the EPA IDEA (Integrated Data for Enforcement Analysis) 
system, which is an integrated, multi-media data system that contains information 
on all EPA-regulated facilities. 
The minimum data requirements are approved by the Office of Management and 
Budget through the Information Collection Request process.  The most recent set 
of minimum data requirements became effective in Fiscal Year 2006.  In that 
year, EPA began requiring States to submit MACT subpart information for each 
MACT facility.  However, this requirement is being phased in and EPA does not 
expect AFS to contain this information for the entire MACT universe until Fiscal 
Year 2011. As part of future requests to the Office of Management and Budget, 
OECA plans to request the addition of partial compliance evaluation and stack 
test data to the list of minimum data requirements, pending AFS modernization.   
Additionally, some States were not reporting all of the minimum data 
requirements to AFS.  For example, staff from Region 5 told us that Illinois had 
not submitted a large amount of the required minimum data to AFS due to 
resource constraints and the lack of an interface between the State’s database and 
EPA’s AFS database.  Texas has also had a long-running problem submitting data 
to AFS because the State’s system was not compatible with AFS.  The State 
recently uploaded new data into AFS, but this update had not yet been completed 
at the time we conducted our analysis.  EPA regional air program managers told 
us of at least two other States with similar problems, but said these States have 
since taken action to improve their data submission to AFS. 
OECA staff and managers told us that more detailed and complete information on 
State compliance monitoring activities would enable them to more effectively 
manage the MACT compliance monitoring program.  For example, OECA could 
compare a facility’s emissions trends to the type of compliance monitoring 
activity conducted at a facility.  This information would help OECA evaluate the 
adequacy of the State’s compliance monitoring program and identify whether a 
State needed additional oversight or guidance.  In addition, this information 
would enable OECA to better target its own compliance monitoring activities.     
15 

Conclusions 
NEI data and ambient monitoring data indicate that air toxics emissions declined 
after implementation of the MACT program.  Based on our analysis, we believe it 
is reasonable to conclude that the MACT standards have reduced air toxics 
emissions.  However, because of data limitations, it is uncertain the extent to 
which emissions reductions have occurred or can be attributed to the MACT 
standards. In addition to emissions data of questionable reliability, a significant 
limitation to evaluating the effectiveness of the MACT program is the lack of key 
information in EPA databases for tracking MACT-related compliance monitoring 
activities.  
Agency Comments and OIG Evaluation 
The Agency did not have any comments on this chapter. 
16 

Chapter 3
Air Toxics Inventory Data Need to Be Improved 
Before Being Used in Residual Risk Assessments 
EPA needs to improve its NEI data before the Agency uses it to conduct air toxics 
residual risk assessments.  The quality of EPA’s air toxics inventory data has 
taken on increased importance with EPA’s decision to rely on NEI data to 
conduct residual risk assessments.  Residual risk assessments require accurate 
facility-specific emission data in order for EPA to determine the public health risk 
resulting from exposure to air toxics. However, EPA has not established data 
quality objectives specifying the quality of data needed for this decision making 
process as recommended by EPA guidance. Further, EPA continues to rely on 
voluntary efforts to collect air toxics emissions data from States, which hampers 
its ability to obtain complete, consistent, and timely data.  If emissions and the 
subsequent risk derived from those emissions for specific source categories are 
understated, important regulations to protect public health may go undeveloped.  
Conversely, if emissions are overstated, requirements that are not cost-beneficial 
could be placed on industries. 
Reliability of NEI Data is Uncertain 
Air toxics emissions data come from several sources, often with associated data 
limitations.  Data sources for the NEI include State-reported data, data gathered 
by EPA during industry-specific rulemakings, industry-reported data from the 
Toxics Release Inventory, and data derived from national estimates.  Further, the 
methodology used to develop emission estimates reported in the NEI can differ 
between and within the sources of the data.  For example, different States may use 
different methodologies to develop the emission estimates sent to EPA.  Also, 
most air toxics emissions data are provided to EPA on a voluntary basis. 
Review of the point source codes for EPA’s 2002 NEI data showed improvement 
from the 1990 NEI data.  The source codes identify the sources of data used in the 
development of NEI data, and are useful in evaluating the data’s quality.  We 
found data source codes for point sources generally to be well populated in EPA’s 
2002 NEI. 
Within EPA’s NEI database, Emission Calculation Method Codes (ECMCs) are 
used to indicate how emissions measurements are derived.  ECMCs provide 
important information on the quality of the emissions data, since the reliability of 
emissions estimates varies greatly based on the calculation method used.  We 
reviewed ECMC records from an updated dataset of 2002 NEI point sources 
provided by EPA’s Emissions Inventory and Analysis Group in June 2007.  We 
found that the ECMS field was blank for 57 percent of the data points.  The 
proportion of the unpopulated records represented about 39 percent of total point 
17 

source emissions.  Further, emissions factors accounted for 37 percent of the data 
points and nearly 40 percent of the reported emissions.  Emissions factors are 
representative values that relate the amount of pollutant emitted to the atmosphere 
to an activity associated with the source (e.g., kilograms of nitrogen oxide emitted 
per unit of fuel burned). As noted in prior OIG reports, emissions estimates 
derived from emissions factors are generally not considered to be of high quality, 
particularly for site-specific emissions estimates, and EPA recommends against 
such use. Table 3-1 shows the number and types of ECMCs recorded for the 
2002 NEI Data. 
Table 3-1: Type and Number of Emission Calculation Methods Used for NEI Data 
Emission 
Calculation 
Method Code 
Emission 
Calculation Method 
Description 
Number of 
Records 
Percentage of 
Records 
Emissions 
(Tons per 
year) 
Proportion 
of 
Emissions 
NA 
NO EMISSION 
1,022,797 
56.60% 
363,240 
38.96% 
CALCULATION 
METHOD CODE 
01 
CONTINUOUS 
EMISSIONS 
MONITORING SYSTEM 
5,707 
0.32% 
13,004 
1.39% 
04 
STACK TEST 
14,786 
0.82% 
27,023 
2.90% 
03 
MATERIAL BALANCE 
48,953 
2.71% 
86,587 
9.29% 
08 
EPA EMISSION 
315,330 
17.45% 
252,474 
27.08% 
FACTOR 
09 
STATE/LOCAL 
EMISSION FACTOR 
329,384 
18.23% 
53,483 
5.74% 
10 
SITE-SPECIFIC 
8,920 
0.49% 
36,200 
3.88% 
EMISSION FACTOR 
11 
VENDER EMISSION 
FACTOR 
4,680 
0.26% 
19,075 
2.05% 
12 
TRADE GROUP 
11,634 
0.64% 
7,832 
0.84% 
EMISSION FACTOR 
05 
EPA SPECIATION 
PROFILE 
12,151 
0.67% 
6,480 
0.70% 
06 
STATE/LOCAL 
106 
0.01% 
109 
0.01% 
SPECIATION PROFILE 
07 
MANUFACTURER 
SPECIFICATION 
736 
0.04% 
1,213 
0.13% 
02 
ENGINEERING 
31,895 
1.77% 
65,518 
7.03% 
JUDGMENT 
Totals a 
1,807,079 
100.00% 
932,237 
100.00% 
a = Totals may not equal due to rounding. 
Source: Data extracted from the NEI National Output format database by OAQPS. 
The heavy use of emissions factors in the NEI makes the reliability of the data 
highly uncertain. Emissions factors can result in emissions data of questionable 
reliability, particularly at the facility level.  For example, managers at two primary 
aluminum plants we contacted stated that they found the emissions factors used to 
estimate hydrogen fluoride emissions were underreporting emissions prior to 
implementation of the MACT requirements.  A prior OIG report also noted 
instances where the use of unreliable emissions factors resulted in underreporting 
of emissions.  Additionally, the Agency has not completed the corrective actions 
for the emissions factors program it agreed to address based on a March 2006 
18 

OIG report.9  Our prior report noted that the percentage of emissions factors rated 
below average or poor increased from 56 percent in 1996 to 62 percent in 2004.  
The most reliable methods of measuring emissions as indicated in EPA’s 2002 
NEI documentation are continuous emissions monitoring systems (CEMS) and 
stack tests. However, actual measurements such as stack tests and CEMS account 
for less than 2 percent of the measurements and less than 5 percent of total 
emissions.  Further, this percentage is unlikely to improve since, according to 
EPA staff, none of the MACT standards requires air toxics to be measured by 
CEMS. The lack of emissions calculation methodology data, coupled with the 
heavy reliance on emissions factors to develop the NEI, casts doubt on the quality 
and reliability of NEI data for making residual risk decisions. 
The NEI data are an important starting point for the residual risk process.  The 
NEI data are input into air quality models used to estimate ambient air toxic 
concentrations. In turn, these modeled ambient concentrations are input into other 
models that estimate public health risk from exposure to air toxics.  The public 
health risk estimate is a key factor in EPA deciding whether or not to issue 
additional standards to reduce air toxics emissions.   
EPA and Other Studies Have Noted Uncertainties with Air Toxics Data 
EPA’s OAQPS acknowledged that there are uncertainties in the NEI data when it 
submitted its residual risk plan to the Science Advisory Board for review.  
OAQPS noted that: 
. . .  the accuracy of emissions values will vary depending on the 
source of the data present in NEI, incomplete or missing data, 
errors in estimating emissions values, and other factors. 
Additionally, some emission values in the ANPRM [Advance 
Notice of Proposed Rulemaking] data set are estimates developed 
from emission factors, mass-balance calculations, or other 
methods and thus lack the precision and verifiable nature of actual 
stack measurements. Even stack measurements have associated 
uncertainty due to factor[s] such as measurement error and the 
long–term representativeness of monitoring data. 
OAQPS also acknowledged that some of the NEI data were incomplete, as 
follows: 
The NEI contains incomplete emissions data for some source 
categories. With regard to these source categories, we derived 
emissions data from the 1999 NEI, which, absent more specific or 
recent data, we assumed to be equivalent to 2002 emissions. Where 
9 EPA Can Improve Emissions Factors Development and Management, Report No. 2006-P-00017, March 22, 2006. 
19 

data were not available in the 1999 NEI, we derived data from the 
Toxics Release Inventory (TRI). TRI emissions values are not 
subject to the same QA procedures that NEI estimates are, and the 
TRI database lacks some data fields and levels of specificity that 
are required for accurate dispersion modeling. 
EPA’s Science Advisory Board reviewed EPA’s Risk and Technology Review 
plan and made several recommendations for improving the residual risk process 
in a June 2007 memorandum to the EPA Administrator.  The following two 
recommendations in particular addressed the role of the NEI accuracy and 
uncertainty of the emissions data:  
• 
The plan should incorporate a framework for improving the NEI as new/more 
accurate data become available. There is a concern that the use of the 
voluntary NEI data base for a regulatory purpose could induce changes in 
reporting that modify the data base. 
• 
A sensitivity analysis should be conducted to determine: (1) which inputs are 
the main drivers of the residual risk estimates, and (2) if differences in the 
levels of uncertainty for those inputs (for example, uncertainties in emissions 
from some sources compared to others) may potentially result in 
misclassification.  
EPA plans to do a sensitivity analysis for the more complex residual risk 
assessments with higher estimated risks that may trigger the need for additional 
standards.  EPA did not conduct sensitivity analyses for the first eight assessments 
conducted under its current Risk and Technology Review approach, since EPA 
determined that these categories posed low risks.  EPA plans to rely on its current 
approach for improving the NEI data and the premise that using the data to 
conduct residual risk assessments will induce improvements in NEI reporting.   
An August 2005 NARSTO report10 discussed the uncertainty associated with air 
toxics inventories.  NARSTO noted that: 
The data that do exist for these pollutants are generally derived not from 
direct measurements, but from models that frequently rely on limited out-
of-date data, and which are rarely subject to analyses of uncertainty.  
Data Quality Objectives Have Not Been Established 
EPA guidance recommends the use of the Data Quality Objectives Process when 
using environmental data.  However, EPA has not established data quality 
objectives for using NEI data in residual risk assessments. According to EPA’s 
Improving Emission Inventories for Effective Air Quality Management Across North America, NARSTO 05-001, 
August 2005. NARSTO is a public/private partnership including the United States, Canada, and Mexico that was 
formed to improve management of air quality in North America.   
20 
10 

February 2006 Guidance on Systematic Planning Using the Data Quality 
Objectives Process: 
EPA developed the Data Quality Objectives (DQO) Process as the 
Agency’s recommended planning process when environmental data 
are used to select between two alternatives or derive an estimate of 
contamination. The DQO Process is used to develop performance and 
acceptance criteria (or data quality objectives) that clarify study 
objectives, define the appropriate type of data, and specify tolerable 
levels of potential decision errors that will be used as the basis for 
establishing the quality and quantity of data needed to support 
decisions. 
The Data Quality Objectives Process also calls for the user to establish “acceptable 
quantitative criteria on the quality and quantity of the data to be collected, relative to 
the ultimate use of the data.”  These acceptance criteria typically involve measures of 
precision, bias, representativeness, completeness, comparability, and sensitivity. 
EPA’s plan for conducting residual risk assessments does not include 
pre-established performance criteria for accepting the NEI air toxics emissions 
data. Instead, EPA issued an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking asking for 
public comments on the NEI data EPA plans to use in its residual risk 
assessments.  At the time we issued our report, EPA was reviewing the public 
comments and revising the inventory where comments supported changes.  
According to OAQPS staff, comments had resulted in a 4-percent decrease in NEI 
total emissions as of the end of July 2007.  EPA has also begun to qualitatively 
rank the data from A to E.  OAQPS plans to consider these qualitative rankings 
when conducting residual risk assessments to the extent they are available.  
Although OAQPS plans to describe the limitation and uncertainties associated 
with the NEI data, it does not plan to reject data based on its quality.  
No Reporting Requirement for Air Toxics Emissions Data 
Since EPA has not established an air toxics emissions reporting requirement, EPA 
continues to employ voluntary efforts to collect air toxics emissions data.  While 
the percentage of State-reported data has increased from 54 percent in 1990 to 
67 percent in 2002, EPA’s reliance on voluntary efforts to provide air toxics NEI 
data has not provided assurance that the data are accurate and reliable.  A 
reporting requirement would help ensure that all States submit data, the States 
submit data in a consistent format, and the data include important information 
such as the methodology used to develop the data.  Although our 2004 report11 on 
air toxics recommended that EPA develop such a requirement, EPA did not 
implement our recommendation because EPA questioned whether it had the 
statutory authority to require the inventories.  In contrast, EPA does require States 
EPA’s Method for Calculating Air Toxics Emissions for Reporting Results Needs Improvement, Report No. 
2004-P-00012, March 31, 2004. 
21 
11 

to submit emissions data for criteria pollutants in accordance with the 
requirements of the 2002 Consolidated Emissions Reporting Rule.   
According to OAQPS staff, EPA considered including an air toxics emissions 
reporting requirement in a January 2006 proposed Air Emissions Reporting 
Requirements rule.  Although this proposed rule did not include such a 
requirement, EPA received a comment from the National Association of Clean 
Air Agencies12 strongly encouraging EPA to require Title V facilities13 to report 
air toxics emissions data.  As of April 2007, the final rule had not been published.  
OAQPS management and staff re-iterated that the lack of clear statutory authority 
to establish an air toxic reporting requirement was a major obstacle to 
implementing this rule.   
Use of NEI Inventory Data Could Result in Unreliable Residual 
Risk Assessments 
EPA’s residual risk assessments and the resulting decisions of whether to develop 
residual risk standards represent a significant CAA requirement.  These decisions 
can have important ramifications for public health and control costs for affected 
industries. Uncertainties or errors in the air toxics emissions inventories used to 
develop these risk assessments could impact EPA’s final decisions.  EPA’s Data 
Quality Objectives guidance describes the potential impact of data errors on 
decisions as follows: 
. . . these data [that is, data used in decision-making] are subject 
to various types of errors due to such factors as how samples were 
collected, how measurements were made, etc.  As a result, 
estimates or conclusions that you make from the collected data 
may deviate from what is actually true within the population. 
Therefore, there is a chance that you will make erroneous 
conclusions based on your collected data or that the uncertainty in 
your estimates will exceed what is acceptable to you.  
With respect to residual risk decisions, if emissions and the subsequent risk 
derived from those emissions are understated, EPA may not develop regulations 
that are needed to protect public health.  Conversely, if emissions and the 
subsequent residual risk are overstated, regulatory requirements that are not cost 
effective could be placed on industries. 
12 This association represents air pollution control agencies in the 50 U.S. States, 4 U.S. Territories, and over 
165 metropolitan areas.  The association was formerly known as STAPPA/ALAPCO (State and Territorial Air 
Pollution Program Administrators/Association of Local Air Pollution Control Officials). 
13 All major sources (i.e., any source that emits or has the potential to emit 100 tons or more a year of any criteria 
pollutant), and certain areas sources are required by the 1990 CAA Amendments to obtain Title V permits.  
A Title V permit grants a source permission to operate, and includes all air pollution requirements that apply to the 
source.  It also requires that the source report its compliance status with respect to permit conditions. 
22 

Conclusions 
EPA has not established a process to ensure that the air toxics emissions data used 
in residual risk assessments meet data quality objectives as recommended by 
Agency guidance. Ideally, data that meet pre-determined performance criteria 
should be used for residual risk decisions because of the significant impact these 
decisions could have on the public’s health and the regulated community.  While 
OAQPS plans to characterize the limitations and uncertainties of their risk 
assessments, these characterizations as planned would not quantitatively describe 
the range of the potential errors associated with these assessments.  
Recommendations 
We recommend the Principal Deputy Assistant Administrator for Air and 
Radiation: 
3-1 
Establish data quality objectives for data used in conducting residual risk 
assessments. 
3-2 
Revise the Consolidated Emissions Reporting Rule to require standardized 
State reporting requirements and methods for calculating air toxics 
emissions data.  
Agency Comments and OIG Evaluation 
The Agency did not express disagreement with the report’s findings, but 
disagreed with several conclusions as well as with the OIG’s recommendations.    
The Agency stated that it plans to improve the quality and consistency of the NEI 
data, but does not commit to establishing data quality objectives.  The Agency 
agreed that establishing air toxics emissions reporting requirements could 
improve the quality of NEI data.  However, the Agency said that such 
requirements were not appropriate at this time.  Thus, the Agency plans to 
continue to rely on voluntary efforts to obtain air toxics NEI data. 
We do not believe the Agency’s response sufficiently addresses the problems 
disclosed in this report, and we consider the issues unresolved.  A summary of the 
Agency’s response to each recommendation and our evaluation of the Agency’s 
comments follows. A copy of the Agency’s complete response is included in 
Appendix I. 
Recommendation 3-1 
The Agency disagreed with our recommendation that it establish data quality 
objectives for data used in conducting residual risk assessments.  The Office of 
Air and Radiation commented that quantifiable data quality objectives or 
23 

acceptance criteria for the use of data within the NEI were not practicable or 
appropriate within the current assembly and use of the NEI.  The Office of Air 
and Radiation noted that for the NEI, it uses a Quality System based on an 
acceptance process to determine if the inventory is suitable for the purpose(s) for 
which it is to be used. According to the Office of Air and Radiation, this process 
includes numerous quality reviews by both EPA and its State/local partners and 
generally incorporates multiple elements, such as: (1) data/information flow 
monitoring and checks; (2) clear decision points in the data flow; (3) decisions by 
professional experts in assessing data elements through mass balance calculations, 
statistical determinations, and other tools; and (4) data acceptance determinations 
regarding the usability of the data/information for the intended purpose. 
The OIG continues to believe that data quality objectives should be established 
for emissions data used in conducting residual risk assessments.  As the Office of 
Air and Radiation noted in its response, the intended use of data determines the 
quality of data needed. In the case of the Risk and Technology Review process, 
the emissions data serve as the foundation for EPA’s residual risk assessments 
and the establishment of residual risk standards under section 112(f) of the CAA.  
In response to EPA’s Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, several State 
agencies and industry groups cited NEI data quality problems and questioned its 
suitability for residual risk assessments.  Of particular note: 
• The National Association of Clean Air Agencies expressed serious 
concerns about the quality of NEI data and its use in conducting residual 
risk assessments, and suggested that EPA use its CAA section 114 
authority to collect the emissions data needed for residual risk 
assessments. 
• The American Shipbuilding Association stated that it was deeply 
concerned about EPA making decisions affecting their industry "based 
upon an unrealistic selection of data that is not only incomplete and 
inaccurate, but one that almost seems to disregard the importance of 
relevance as a determinative factor."  They also stated that "Some of the 
data is by far too inaccurate to be used for modeling and residual risk 
assessment for individual facilities."  
• The American Petroleum Institute expressed similar concerns in stating 
that "It is inappropriate for the Agency to use low quality data on the 
basis that the regulated community did not provide better data.  Yet this is 
what the Agency proposes to do for the RTR [Risk and Technology 
Review] 2 rulemaking."  In order to obtain better data, the American 
Petroleum Institute recommended that EPA work directly with sources to 
obtain the information voluntarily, use its section 114 authority, or 
promulgate a rule requiring the submission of necessary data. 
As noted in comments to the Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking, the 
existing NEI database is not the only option for obtaining emissions data for risk 
assessments.  The Agency has explicit authority under CAA section 114 to obtain 
24 

emissions data from stationary sources in order to develop or assist in the 
development of any emissions standard under section 112.  The Agency could use 
such authority to collect emissions data for residual risk assessments if NEI data 
are not of sufficient quality. 
Recommendation 3-2 
The Office of Air and Radiation agreed that establishing requirements for 
reporting air toxics emissions data to the NEI could improve the quality of such 
data. However, the Agency commented that such requirements were not 
appropriate at this time.  The Agency pointed to its evolving efforts to improve 
the air toxics emission inventory by working with its State and local partners and 
industry. 
EPA outlined several reasons why an air toxics emissions reporting requirement 
was needed when it proposed the 2002 Consolidated Emissions Reporting Rule.  
In the rule’s proposal EPA stated that air toxics emissions inventories were 
needed to: conduct better oversight of the Title V program; develop and assess 
progress of the CAA-required control strategy for reducing public health risk 
from area sources; and assess progress in meeting Government Performance and 
Results Act goals for reducing the public’s cumulative health risk from exposure 
to air toxics emissions.  Although it did not include an air toxics reporting 
requirement in the final rule, EPA stated that it planned “to develop HAP 
reporting measures at a future date.”  EPA continues to rely on voluntary 
reporting efforts which, in our view, have not provided reasonable assurance that 
the NEI data are accurate and reliable.  Given the Agency’s decision to also use 
NEI data for residual risk assessments, we believe it is inappropriate for the 
Agency to delay implementation of an air toxics reporting requirement to improve 
data quality. 
As mentioned above, EPA already has authority under CAA section 114 to collect 
air toxics emissions data from stationary sources.  Thus, the Agency could use 
section 114 authority to obtain data for residual risk assessments, even if routine 
reporting of air toxics emissions was not required at this time. 
25 

Status of Recommendations and 
Potential Monetary Benefits 
POTENTIAL MONETARY 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
BENEFITS (in $000s) 2 
Rec. 
No. 
Page 
No. 
Subject 
Status1 
Action Official 
Planned 
Completion 
Date 
Claimed 
Amount 
Agreed To 
Amount 
3-1 
23 
Establish data quality objectives for data used in 
conducting residual risk assessments. 
O 
Principal Deputy 
Assistant Administrator 
for Air and Radiation 
3-2 
23 
Revise the Consolidated Emissions Reporting Rule 
to require standardized State reporting 
requirements and methods for calculating air toxics 
emissions data. 
O 
Principal Deputy 
Assistant Administrator 
for Air and Radiation 
1  O = recommendation is open with agreed-to corrective actions pending;   
     C = recommendation is closed with all agreed-to actions completed;   
     U = recommendation is undecided with resolution efforts in progress.  
2 Identification of potential monetary benefits was not an objective of this evaluation. 
26 

Appendix A 
Details on Scope and Methodology 
To address the extent to which MACT standards have reduced air toxics and achieved the 
emission reductions anticipated, we assessed the changes in air toxics emissions between 1990 
and 2002 using EPA’s NEI. Since all of the MACTs were promulgated after passage of the 1990 
CAA Amendments, the 1990 NEI serves as a baseline of pre-MACT air toxics emissions.  The 
2002 NEI was the most current inventory available.  After we had completed the majority of our 
field work and analyses, EPA released an updated version of the 2002 inventory in March 2007.  
Accordingly, we updated our analyses using the March 2007 revised updated NEI data.  This 
latest update is generally known as NEI 2002 Version 3.  Our overall analyses of MACT 
emissions included the following: 
• 
First, we compared 1990 and 2002 emissions for only those emissions assigned to 
specific MACT codes. Since differences exist between the 1990 and 2002 inventories, 
we used only NEI records that were comparable between the 2 years' inventories when 
comparing emissions for specific MACT categories.  That is, we only included emissions 
for air toxics that were included in both inventories for that MACT category.  After 
presenting our preliminary results to OAQPS, they commented that our emissions totals 
did not accurately account for certain categories of air toxics.  This was typically the case 
for speciated pollutants such as Polycyclic Organic Matter (POM), Chromium, Xylene, 
and Cresol that needed to be compared on a category basis.  The HAP category is an EPA 
convention that includes all the species of a particular HAP.  We adjusted our MACT 
category emission totals to properly account for speciated toxics as recommended by 
OAQPS. These adjustments did not materially impact the total MACT emissions. 
• 
Second, we compared 1990 and 2002 emissions for only those MACT standards that had 
compliance dates prior to 2002.  Since these MACT source categories should have been 
in compliance before 2002, the 2002 NEI should serve as a post-MACT measure of air 
toxics emissions reductions.   
• 
We also compared emissions of the 6 key HAPs from these 27 MACT categories in 1990 
and 2002. The key HAPs are those air toxics identified by OAQPS as posing the highest 
cancer and non-cancer risks on average nationwide.   
We selected three MACT source categories for more in-depth analysis.  We selected these 
MACTs from the universe of MACTs with compliance dates prior to 2002.  We used the 
following criteria in selecting the three MACTs for in-depth analyses: 
• Air toxics emissions from the source category pose a relatively large public health risk. 
• The NEI data for the source category are among the most reliable/accurate. 
• Anticipated emission reductions from the MACT are large. 
• Changes in air toxics emissions are not due to obvious external factors. 
27 

The following table illustrates the three MACTs selected using the above criteria: 
Table A.1: MACTS Selected for Review 
MACT 
Date Issued 
No. Air Toxics Targeted 
by the MACT Standard 
Petroleum Refinery MACT (Subpart CC) 
August 18, 1995 
10 
Primary Aluminum MACT (Subpart LL) 
October 7, 1997 
3 
Pulp and Paper MACT I & III (Subpart S) 
April 15, 1998 
13 
Source: Developed by OIG staff based on information from EPA 
We also interviewed EPA staff and industry groups, and conducted literature searches, to 
identify external factors that may have impacted emissions for these three MACT categories.   
To address what factors are associated with the effectiveness of the MACT standards in 
achieving emission reductions, we selected nine facilities from the three MACTs above for even 
greater in-depth analyses.  We selected these nine facilities based on emissions of certain 
pollutants of concern contained in the 2002 NEI Version 1.  Specifically: 
• 
For the Petroleum Refinery MACT, we selected the three facilities with the highest 
reported emissions of benzene.  We used benzene because EPA had identified benzene as 
one of six key HAPs, and petroleum refineries are large emitters of benzene. 
• 
For the Primary Aluminum MACT, we selected the three facilities with the highest 
reported emissions of POM.  We used POM because it is highly toxic and is a common 
pollutant from primary aluminum smelters.14 
• 
For the Pulp and Paper MACT I & III, we selected the three facilities with the highest 
reported emissions of formaldehyde.  We used formaldehyde because EPA had identified 
it as one of six key HAPs, and pulp and paper mills are relatively large emitters of 
formaldehyde.15 
For each of these nine facilities, we reviewed and compared emissions data from the TRI and 
NEI, as well as compliance and enforcement data from EPA’s IDEA system.  We conducted 
semi-structured interviews with representatives from the facilities, and also with agency staff 
from the States in which the facilities are located.  We also conducted interviews with staff from 
the EPA regions where these facilities and States are located.  However, because of limitations in 
the compliance monitoring and compliance assistance data, we were unable to fully address our 
objective of determining whether there was an association between compliance monitoring and 
compliance assistance activities and emission trends.  Instead, we relied upon interviews of 
knowledgeable individuals and various studies to qualitatively assess the impact of compliance 
monitoring and compliance assistance on air toxics emissions reductions from MACT sources.  
Since the three MACT categories and nine facilities we selected for in-depth review were not 
14 One of the top emitters of POM in the primary aluminum industry was not in operation at the time of our review,  
so we selected the next highest emitter to be part of our sample.  
15 According to EPA staff, in the last 3-4 years, the toxicity risk for formaldehyde has been lowered, and is no longer 
considered a key HAP, but controversy remains over this action. 
28 

randomly selected, our findings and recommendations may not be representative of the MACT 
universe as a whole. 
While conducting field work, we identified several significant problems with the NEI data, and 
learned that EPA is planning to use the 2002 NEI to conduct residual risk analyses for a large 
number of source categories under the Risk and Technology Review process.16  Given our 
concerns with the quality of the air toxics emissions inventory data and EPA’s intent to use this 
same data to make regulatory decisions, we conducted additional steps not included in our 
original project plan and evaluation objectives.  For example, we reviewed documents pertaining 
to the Risk and Technology Review process, reviewed the updated Risk and Technology Review 
data files, and interviewed EPA staff involved in the residual risk process. 
Locations Reviewed 
Our evaluation focused on two EPA headquarters offices: (1) OAQPS within the Office of Air 
and Radiation, and (2) OECA.  OAQPS, located in Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, 
developed the MACT standards and many of the compliance assistance tools for affected 
industries to use in reducing air toxics emissions.  OECA, located in Washington, DC, is 
responsible for ensuring compliance with the MACT standards.  Since the regions and States do 
most of the actual implementation of the MACT standards, we also contacted the following five 
regions and seven States: 
Table A.2: Regions and States Contacted 
EPA Region 
States 
Region 3 - Philadelphia 
West Virginia 
Region 4 - Atlanta 
Mississippi, South Carolina 
Region 5 - Chicago 
Region 6 - Dallas 
Oklahoma, Texas 
Region 7 - Kansas City 
Kansas, Missouri 
Source: Developed by OIG staff 
Additionally, to determine how facilities calculated their reported emissions and the extent to 
which external factors may have influenced reported reductions, we interviewed representatives 
of eight of the nine facilities selected for greater in-depth analyses.  Representatives from one 
pulp and paper facility, despite repeated attempts to schedule an interview, did not respond to our 
requests. We also conducted interviews with outside stakeholders.  
Review of Management (Internal) Controls 
Government Auditing Standards require that auditors obtain an understanding of internal controls 
significant to the audit objectives and consider whether specific internal control procedures have 
been properly designed and placed in operation.  Our overall objective was to determine the 
extent to which MACT standards have reduced air toxics and achieved the emission reductions 
anticipated.  We reviewed management controls related to the objective of this evaluation.  This 
included EPA’s policy and procedures for administering and managing the MACT Program for 
16 As explained in Chapter 3, EPA has asked stakeholders to review the NEI data for 22 MACT source categories 
before using the data to complete the mandated residual risk analyses. 
29 

the three sample MACT categories issued by EPA’s OAQPS.  As part of this review, we 
examined analytical, documentary, and testimonial evidence from five EPA regions, seven 
States, and nine facilities (three each in the Petroleum Refinery industry, Primary Aluminum 
industry, and the Pulp and Paper industry). 
We found the internal controls did not ensure reliable data from the AFS.  This system is the 
primary source of compliance data for facilities regulated by the CAA, including MACT sources.  
Our concerns with this system are discussed in Chapter 2.  We also found the internal controls 
did not ensure that data generated by or for OAQPS are of known and acceptable quality.  Our 
concerns with data quality are discussed in Chapter 3. 
Data Limitations 
EPA has taken steps to improve the NEI since our 2004 report (see “Prior Reports” below) 
discussed concerns with the accuracy of air toxics emissions data.  These improvements include 
revisions made to the 2002 NEI after we started our field work.  However, as discussed in 
Chapter 3, significant data quality concerns still exist with this inventory.  
The reliability of trends analyses is limited by improvements to the 2002 data, which impacts the 
comparability of this data to the 1990 data.  For example, changes to the 2002 NEI have resulted 
in: 
• 
increases in the number of facilities and emissions sources, 
• 
increases in the number of air toxics with reported emissions, and 
• 
changes in the MACT code assigned to some sources. 
Prior Reports 
The OIG conducted one prior evaluation that indirectly related to the effectiveness of the MACT 
standards. This report, EPA’s Methods for Calculating Air Toxics for Reporting Needs 
Improvement (2004-P-00012), issued March 31, 2004, noted that EPA was measuring the overall 
air toxics program’s progress based on total air toxics emissions reductions without considering 
the toxicity of the pollutants.  The report recommended that EPA include a risk-based factor in 
its program measurement.  In response to our recommendation, EPA has started using toxicity-
weighted measures to evaluate the air toxics program. 
The OIG and GAO conducted several prior audits/evaluations that addressed EPA’s 
development of the MACT standards in accordance with the timelines established by the CAA 
and efforts to incorporate MACT requirements into individual facility operating permits.  These 
prior reports did not specifically review the effectiveness of the MACT standards in reducing air 
toxics emissions.  These prior reports are: 
30 

Prior OIG Reports: 
• EPA and State Progress in Issuing Title V Permits, Report No. 2002-P-00008, March 29, 
2002 
• Substantial Changes Needed in Implementation and Oversight of Title V Permits If 
Program Goals Are To Be Fully Realized, Report No. 2005-P-00010, March 9, 2005 
Prior GAO Reports: 
• Air Pollution: Status of Implementation and Issues of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 
1990, GAO/RCED-00-72, April 2000 
• EPA Has Completed Most of the Actions Required by the 1990 Amendments, but Many 
Were Completed Late, GAO-05-613, May 2005 
• EPA Should Improve the Management of Its Air Toxics Program, GAO-06-669, June 
2006 
31 

Appendix B 
Amount and Percent of Change in NEI 
Air Toxics Emissions Between 1990 and 2002 
MACT Source Category 
1990 NEI 
(tons per year)  
2002 NEI 
Version 3 
(tons  per year) 
Change 
(2002-1990)    
(tons  per year) 
Percent 
Change 
(2002-1990) 
Aerospace Industries 
209,666 
2,305 
-207,361 
-99% 
Agricultural Chemicals and Pesticides 
Manufacturing 
1,147 
1,433 
286 
25% 
Auto & Light Duty Truck (Surface 
Coating) 
35,565 
6,762 
-28,803 
-81% 
Boat Manufacturing 
8,868 
7,325 
-1,543 
-17% 
Brick and Structural Clay Products 
Manufacturing 
5,562 
6,635 
1,073 
19% 
Carbon Black Production 
6,970 
1,550 
-5,420 
-78% 
Cellulose Products Manufacturing 
4,696 
2,182 
-2,514 
-54% 
Chromium Electroplating 
184 
5 
-179 
-97% 
Clay Ceramics Manufacturing 
982 
771 
-211 
-21% 
Coke Ovens:  Charging, Top Side, and 
Door Leaks 
2,214 
64 
-2,150 
-97% 
Coke Ovens:  Pushing, Quenching, & 
Battery Stacks 
904 
1,327 
423 
47% 
Commercial Sterilization Facilities 
308 
46 
-262 
-85% 
Dry Cleaning Facilities: 
Perchloroethylene 
77,698 
22,117 
-55,581 
-72% 
Engine Test Cells/Stands 
745 
716 
-29 
-4% 
Ethylene Processes 
439 
500 
61 
14% 
Ferroalloys Production 
714 
293 
-421 
-59% 
Flexible Polyurethane Foam Fabrication 
Operations 
12 
20 
8.00 
67% 
Flexible Polyurethane Foam Production 
16,335 
2,589 
-13,746.00 
-84% 
Friction Materials Manufacturing 
1,948 
225 
-1,723.00 
-88% 
Gasoline Distribution (Stage I) 
33,241 
80,028 
46,787 
141% 
Halogenated Solvent Cleaners 
137,982 
39,451 
-98,531 
-71% 
Hazardous Waste Incineration: 
Commercial 
10,605 
9,616 
-989 
-9% 
Hydrochloric Acid Production 
61,048 
399 
-60,649 
-99% 
Hydrogen Fluoride Production 
4 
5 
1 
25% 
Industrial/Commercial/ Institutional 
Boilers & Process Heaters 
30,323 
221,990 
191,667 
632% 
Integrated Iron & Steel Manufacturing 
11,444 
706 
-10,738 
-94% 
Iron and Steel Foundries 
7,658 
1,628 
-6,030 
-79% 
Large Appliance (Surface Coating) 
12,027 
2,498 
-9,529 
-79% 
Leather Tanning & Finishing Operations 
2,508 
216 
-2,292 
-91% 
Lime Manufacturing 
1 
999 
998 
99800% 
Magnetic Tapes (Surface Coating) 
4,478 
434 
-4,044 
-90% 
Manufacture of Nutritional Yeast 
254 
93 
-161 
-63% 
Marine Vessel Loading Operations 
7,449 
216 
-7,233 
-97% 
Mercury Cell Chlori-Alkali Plants 
88 
18 
-70 
-80% 
32 

MACT Source Category 
1990 NEI 
(tons per year)  
2002 NEI 
Version 3 
(tons  per year) 
Change 
(2002-1990)    
(tons  per year) 
Percent 
Change 
(2002-1990) 
Metal Can (Surface Coating) 
40,574 
3,797 
-36,777 
-91% 
Metal Coil (Surface Coating) 
4,013 
2,285 
-1,728 
-43% 
Metal Furniture (Surface Coating) 
15,664 
759 
-14,905 
-95% 
Mineral Wool Production 
3,253 
482 
-2,771 
-85% 
Miscellaneous Coating Manufacturing 
8,853 
3,988 
-4,865 
-55% 
Miscellaneous Metal Parts & Products 
(Surface Coating) 
61,134 
8,643 
-52,491 
-86% 
Miscellaneous Organic Chemical 
Manufacturing 
96,625 
8,507 
-88,118 
-91% 
Municipal Landfills 
309 
28,945 
28,636 
9267% 
Natural Gas Transmission & Storage 
469 
2,153 
1,684 
359% 
Off-Site Waste and Recovery 
Operations 
435 
17 
-418 
-96% 
Oil & Natural Gas Production 
42,589 
21,541 
-21,048 
-49% 
Organic Liquids Distribution 
(Non-Gasoline) 
147 
1,146 
999 
680% 
Paper & Other Webs (Surface Coating) 
30,706 
3,059 
-27,647 
-90% 
Petroleum Refineries - Catalytic 
Cracking, Catalytic Reforming, & Sulfur 
Plant Units 
3,793 
1,030 
-2,763 
-73% 
Petroleum Refineries - Other Sources 
Not Distinctly Listed 
101,305 
8,717 
-92,588 
-91% 
Pharmaceutical Production 
40,958 
2,458 
-38,500 
-94% 
Phosphate Fertilizers Production 
558 
117 
-441 
-79% 
Phosphoric Acid Manufacturing 
128 
62 
-66 
-52% 
Plastic Parts & Products (Surface 
Coating) 
58,696 
8,015 
-50,681 
-86% 
Plywood and Composite Wood 
Products 
18,702 
10,124 
-8,578 
-46% 
Polyether Polyols Production 
3,699 
170 
-3,529 
-95% 
Polymers and Resins I &II 
26,248 
4,763 
-21,485 
-82% 
Polymers and Resins III 
1,082 
2,042 
960 
89% 
Polymers and Resins IV 
4,008 
730 
-3,278 
-82% 
Polyvinyl Chloride & Copolymers 
Production 
1,127 
59 
-1,068 
-95% 
Portland Cement Manufacturing 
9,691 
4,143 
-5,548 
-57% 
Primary Aluminum Production 
4,069 
4,829 
760 
19% 
Primary Copper Smelting 
157 
37 
-120 
-76% 
Primary Lead Smelting 
297 
60 
-237 
-80% 
Primary Magnesium Refining 
37,535 
7,385 
-30,150 
-80% 
Printing, Coating & Dyeing Of Fabrics 
16,065 
4,562 
-11,503 
-72% 
Printing/Publishing (Surface Coating) 
35,860 
11,089 
-24,771 
-69% 
Publicly Owned Treatment Works  
8,119 
12,031 
3,912 
48% 
Pulp and Paper (Combustion) MACT II 
56,922 
35,637 
-21,285 
-37% 
Pulp & Paper (non-combustion), MACT 
I and III 
247,777 
22,971 
-224,806 
-91% 
Reciprocating Internal Combustion 
Engines (RICE) 
28,484 
8,294 
-20,190 
-71% 
Refractory Products Manufacturing 
238 
78 
-160 
-67% 
Reinforced Plastic Composites 
Production 
14,814 
3,730 
-11,084 
-75% 
33 

MACT Source Category 
1990 NEI 
(tons per year)  
2002 NEI 
Version 3 
(tons  per year) 
Change 
(2002-1990)    
(tons  per year) 
Percent 
Change 
(2002-1990) 
Rubber Tire Production 
2,766 
1,247 
-1,519 
-55% 
Secondary Aluminum Production 
21,860 
2,688 
-19,172 
-88% 
Secondary Lead Smelting 
2,116 
951 
-1,165 
-55% 
Semiconductor Manufacturing 
1,915 
389 
-1,526 
-80% 
Shipbuilding & Ship Repair (Surface 
Coating) 
3,462 
1,455 
-2,007 
-58% 
Site Remediation 
28 
186 
158 
564% 
Solvent Extraction for Vegetable Oil 
Production 
25,549 
16,270 
-9,279 
-36% 
Stationary Combustion Turbines 
550 
1,294 
744 
135% 
Steel Pickling - HCL Process 
3,316 
1,038 
-2,278 
-69% 
Synthetic Organic Chemical 
Manufacturing (Hazardous Organic 
NESHAP) 
546,063 
12,264 
-533,799 
-98% 
Taconite Iron Ore Processing 
0 
133 
133 
443233% 
Viscose Process Manufacturing 
3,216 
2,477 
-739 
-23% 
Wet-Formed Fiberglass Mat Production 
322 
51 
-271 
-84% 
Wood Building Products (Surface 
Coating) 
12,203 
2,790 
-9,413 
-77% 
Wood Furniture (Surface Coating) 
24,403 
10,128 
-14,275 
-58% 
Wool Fiberglass Manufacturing 
6,665 
2,302 
-4,363 
-65% 
Totals 
2,373,604 
709,280 
-1,664,324 
70% 
Source: Data extracted from NEI databases  
34 

Appendix C 
NEI Emissions Reductions Compared to 
Federal Register Anticipated Reductions 
Federal 
Percent 
MACT Category 
Federal 
Register 
Baseline 
(tons  per year) 
Register 
Anticipated 
Reduction 
(tons  per year) 
Federal 
Register 
Anticipated 
Reduction  
1990 NEI 
(tons  per year) 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 
(tons  per year) 
NEI 
 Change 
(2002-1990) 
(tons  per year) 
Percent NEI 
Change 
(2002-1990) 
Anticipated 
Emissions 
Reduction 
Achieved a 
Aerospace Industries 
209,661 
123,700 
59% 
209,666 
2,305 
207,361 
-99% 
Yes 
Chromium Electroplating 
175 
174 
99% 
184 
5 
179 
-97% 
No 
Coke Ovens: Charging, Top 
Side, and Door Leaks 
1,830 
1,532 
84% 
2,214 
64 
2,150 
-97% 
Yes 
Commercial Sterilization 
Facilities 
1,188 
1,140 
96% 
308 
46 
-262 
-85% 
No 
Dry Cleaning Facilities:  
Perchloroethylene 
46,500 
25,800 
55% 
77,698 
22,117 
-55,581 
-72% 
Yes 
Ferroalloys Production 
NA 
0 
0% 
714 
293 
-421 
-59% 
Yes 
Flexible Polyurethane Foam 
Production 
19,924 
13,800 
69% 
16,335 
2,589 
-13,746 
-84% 
Yes 
Gasoline Distribution (Stage I) 
50,706 
2,866 
6% 
33,241 
80,028 
46,786 
141% 
No 
Halogenated Solvent Cleaners 
135,397 
853,000 
63% 
137,982 
39,451 
-98,531 
-71% 
Yes 
Industrial Cooling Towers 
25 
25 
99% 
NA 
2.5 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Magnetic Tape (Surface 
Coating) 
4,470 
2,300 
51% 
4,478 
434 
-4,044 
-90% 
Yes 
Marine Vessel Loading 
Operations 
NA 
4,565 
NA 
7,449 
216 
-7,233 
-97% 
NA 
Off-Site Waste and Recovery 
Operations 
57,320 
47,000 
82% 
435 
17 
-418 
-96% 
Yes 
Petroleum Refineries   
89,618 
52,911 
59% 
101,305 
8,717 
-92,588 
-91% 
Yes 
Pharmaceutical Production 
36,923 
24,000 
65% 
40,958 
2,458 
-38,500 
-94% 
Yes 
Polymers & Resins I b 
14,618 
7,046 
48% 
26,248 
4,763 
-21,485 
-82% 
NA 
Polymers & Resins II 
135 
105 
78% 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Polymers & Resins IV 
19,974 
3,880 
81% 
4,008 
730 
-3,278 
-82% 
Yes 
Primary Aluminum Production c 
11,000 
5,500 
50% 
3,178 
1,832 
1,346 
42% 
No 
Primary Lead Smelting 
NA 
0 
0% 
297 
60 
-237 
-80% 
Yes 
35 

c 
Federal 
Percent 
MACT Category 
Federal 
Register 
Baseline 
(tons  per year) 
Register 
Anticipated 
Reduction 
(tons  per year) 
Federal 
Register 
Anticipated 
Reduction  
1990 NEI 
(tons  per year) 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 
(tons  per year) 
NEI 
 Change 
(2002-1990) 
(tons  per year) 
Percent NEI 
Change 
(2002-1990) 
Anticipated 
Emissions 
Reduction 
Achieved a 
Printing/Publishing (Surface 
Coating) 
23,871 
7,400 
31% 
35,848 
11,088 
-24,760 
-69% 
Yes 
Pulp & Paper Production 
(Subpart S) 
264,555 
153,221 
58% 
247,777 
22,971 
-224,806 
-90% 
Yes 
Secondary Lead Smelting 
2,106 
1,411 
67% 
2,116 
862 
-1,253 
-59% 
No 
Shipbuilding & Ship Repair 
(Surface Coating) 
1,497 
350 
23% 
3,462 
1,353 
-2,109 
-61% 
Yes 
Steel Pickling - HCL Process 
3,289 
2,500 
76% 
3,316 
1,038 
-2,278 
-69% 
No 
Synthetic Organic Chemical 
Manufacturing (Hazardous 
Organic NESHAP) 
573,202 
510,000 
89% 
546,063 
12,260 
-533,803 
-98% 
Yes 
Wood Furniture (Surface 
Coating) 
NA 
32,795 
NA 
24,400 
10,116 
-14,285 
-59% 
NA 
a 
Achievement of the anticipated emissions reduction is based on comparison of NEI percentage reduction to Federal Register percentage reduction. 
b 
The 1900 and 2002 NEI totals for this MACT include both Polymers and Resins I and II.  This is because the emissions for these 2 MACTS cannot be 
separated in the 1990 NEI.     
The Federal Register baseline and anticipated reduction figures for the Primary Aluminum MACT include only emissions of POM and Hydrogen Fluoride.  In  
order to compare the anticipated emissions reductions for this MACT to the NEI emissions changes, we included only POM and Hydrogen Fluoride emissions  
in the NEI figures in this table.  POM emissions from the NEI were determined by summing emissions of POM as PAH-7 and POM as PAH-15.  
NA Data not available to make a determination. 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from Federal Register notices, EPA rule development documents, and 1990 and 2002 NEI databases 
36 

Appendix D 
Detailed Results - Petroleum Refinery MACT 
Petroleum refining is a complex process involving the physical, thermal, and chemical separation 
of crude oil into its major components, which are further processed into a variety of finished 
petroleum products.  Petroleum products represent the single largest source of energy for the 
United States, and include gasoline, jet fuel, home heating oil, and kerosene. According to the 
Energy Information Administration, as of November 2006, 142 refineries were operating in the 
United States. Refineries are located throughout the United States.  The State with the largest 
number of refineries is Texas, followed by California and Louisiana.  Each refinery can have 
thousands of possible emission points. 
The 1995 Petroleum Refinery MACT (Subpart C) controls air toxics emissions from several 
different emission points, including process vents, storage vessels, wastewater streams, gasoline 
loading racks, marine tank vessel loading, and equipment leaks. The MACT incorporates other 
standards, including the 1989 Benzene National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air 
Pollutants (NESHAP)17 and the 1994 regulation for fugitive emissions at certain MACT 
sources,18 often referred to as Leak Detection and Repair (LDAR). The MACT standard targets 
10 primary air toxics emitted by refineries, including 2,2,4-trimethylpentane, benzene, cresols, 
ethylbenzene, hexane, methyl tert butyl ether, naphthalene, phenol, toluene, and xylenes.  
Facilities were to be in full compliance with the Petroleum Refinery MACT by August 18, 1998. 
Aggregate and Targeted Air Toxics for the Petroleum Refining Industry 
Decreased Dramatically 
According to the NEI, air toxics emissions from petroleum refineries decreased dramatically 
between 1990 and 2002. Total emissions of air toxics decreased from 101,305 tons in 1990 to 
8,717 tons in 2002, a reduction of 91 percent. This exceeds the total air toxics emissions 
reductions that EPA anticipated when the MACT was developed in 1995.  EPA anticipated the 
standard would reduce total air toxics emissions from the industry by 59 percent. 
Emissions of all the individual air toxics specifically targeted by the MACT standard also 
decreased significantly between 1990 and 2002. For example, emissions of benzene decreased 
from 6,762 tons in 1990 to 861 tons in 2002, a reduction of 87.3 percent. Table D-1 shows the 
1990 and 2002 NEI emissions figures for each of the targeted air toxics for the Petroleum 
Refinery MACT. 
17 40 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) 61 Subpart FF 
18 40 CFR 63 Subpart H 
37 

Table D-1: Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for the Petroleum Refinery MACT  
Targeted Air Toxics a 
1990 NEI b 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 b 
Change b
 (2002-1990) 
Percent 
Change  
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane 
23,589.0 
138.9 
-23,450.1 
-99.4% 
Benzene 
6,762.0 
861.3 
-5,900.7 
-87.3% 
Cresol 
513.5 
13.1 
-500.4 
-97.5% 
Ethylbenzene 
3,482.4 
280.7 
-3,201.7 
-91.9% 
Hexane 
24,804.4 
1,174.1 
-23,630.3 
-95.3% 
Methyl Tert Butyl Ether 
3,605.3 
427.5 
-3,177.8 
-88.1% 
Naphthalene 
796.1 
69.1 
-727.0 
-91.3% 
Phenol 
216.5 
31.2 
-185.3 
-85.6% 
Toluene 
15,394.8 
1,848.7 
-13,546.1 
-88.0% 
Xylenes (Mixed Isomers) 
13,911.0 
1,615.5 
-12,295.5 
-88.4% 
Total 
93,075.0 
6,460.1 
-86,614.9 
-93.1% 
a Primary air toxics targeted by the Petroleum Refinery MACT per the Federal Register.  
b Tons per year. 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI data   
The decrease in emissions of total air toxics and targeted air toxics in the petroleum refining 
industry coincides with the implementation of the MACT standard.  The compliance date of the 
MACT was August 18, 1998. Thus, based on the NEI data, it appears that the MACT has been 
effective in reducing emissions in the industry.  However, it is not possible to determine from 
this analysis if the decreases in emissions were due only to the MACT standard.  Other external 
factors, such as industry trends or other regulations, may have also impacted emissions at 
petroleum refineries.   
Petroleum Refinery Emissions Decreased Despite Increase in Industry Production 
and Capacity 
Air toxics emissions from petroleum refineries decreased significantly between 1990 and 2002, 
despite an increase in industry production over the same time period.  According to the Energy 
Information Administration, net U.S. production of crude oil and petroleum products increased 
by 13.1 percent over this period, from approximately 5.6 billion barrels in 1990 to about 6.3 
billion barrels in 2002. 
38 

Figure D-1: C omparison of Industry Production to Total Air Toxics Emissions 
Source: Developed by OIG staff based on data from NEI and the Energy Information Administration 
Similarly, total capacity in the refining industry increased between 1990 and 2002.  According to 
the Energy Information Administration, crude oil distillation capacity at operating U.S. refineries 
increased by 7.3 percent, from about 15.1 millions barrels per day in 1990 to about 16.2 million 
barrels per day in 2002. At the same time, the number of operating refineries in the Unites States 
decreased, from 194 in 1990 to 144 in 2002.  Thus, while the total number of U.S. refineries 
decreased, the average capacity at individual refineries has increased.  According to the Energy 
Information Administration, capacity per operating refinery increased by 28 percent from 1990 
to 1998. 
Emissions are generally expected to increase as production and capacity increase.  However, the 
opposite has occurred for the petroleum refining industry – emissions of aggregate and targeted 
air toxics have decreased dramatically, while total production and capacity levels in the industry 
increased. Thus, the decreases in emissions from petroleum refineries cannot be explained by 
industry trends in production or capacity. 
Other Clean Air Act Regulations May Have Impacted Air Toxics Emissions from 
Refineries 
The refining industry is subject to a number of CAA requirements other than the Petroleum 
Refinery MACT, and these requirements may have impacted air toxics emissions at refineries.  
These regulations include New Source Performance Standards, Prevention of Significant 
Deterioration/New Source Review, reformulated gasoline rules, and other MACT standards.   
An industry association regulatory analyst told us that, depending upon its operation and 
configuration, a refinery could be subject to more than 15 different MACT standards, including 
the Hazardous Organic NESHAP, the Miscellaneous Organic NESHAP, and the Cooling Towers 
MACT. Representatives of two of the refineries we contacted said they are subject to the 
39 

Hazardous Organic NESHAP as well as the Petroleum Refinery MACT, and that the Hazardous 
Organic NESHAP has had an impact on emissions at the facility. 
The National Petroleum Refinery Initiative Is Expected to Reduce Benzene and 
Volatile Organic Compound (VOC) Emissions 
EPA’s National Petroleum Refinery Initiative is an integrated compliance and enforcement 
strategy to address air emissions from the petroleum refining industry.  The Refinery Initiative is 
focused on the four most significant CAA compliance issues for the industry:  New Source 
Review/Prevention of Significant Deterioration; Flaring/New Source Performance Standards; 
LDAR; and the Benzene NESHAP. The Refinery Initiative does not focus directly on the 
Petroleum Refinery MACT standard.  However, LDAR and the Benzene NESHAP are 
incorporated into the MACT standard; in order to comply with the Petroleum Refinery MACT, 
facilities must also comply with these standards.   
Since March 2000, EPA has entered into 17 consent decree settlements with U.S. companies that 
refine nearly 77 percent of the nation's petroleum.  These settlements cover 85 refineries in 
25 States and, when fully implemented, should result in annual emissions reductions of 
approximately 80,000 tons of nitrogen oxides and approximately 235,000 tons of sulfur dioxide.  
The consent decrees are expected to result in reductions of fugitive emissions of VOCs, 
including benzene. It is uncertain if any reductions in benzene emissions resulting from the 
Initiative are reflected in the 2002 NEI figures. Over half of the affected refining capacity was 
not yet covered under the settlements in 2002. 
Two of three refineries we contacted have entered into consent decrees with EPA under the 
Refinery Initiative. The third refinery has a consent decree with EPA covering similar issues, 
but a refinery official told us that it is separate from the National Refinery Initiative.  The 
consent decrees for all three of these facilities address LDAR, and officials from two of the 
facilities told us that enhanced LDAR activities have reduced emissions from their facilities.  For 
example, one facility representative told us that the consent decree reduced the leak level for 
which repairs are required from 10,000 parts per million to 500 parts per million.  This has led to 
a reduction in fugitive emissions, which the representative told us is reflected in the facility’s 
TRI figures for 2005. 
Results for Sample Facilities 
We selected three petroleum refineries for more in-depth review of emission changes, actions 
taken to comply with the MACT, external factors impacting emissions, compliance and 
enforcement activities, and use of compliance assistance tools.  We selected these facilities based 
on the highest reported emissions of benzene from the 2002 NEI Version 1.  We selected 
benzene because EPA considers it to be the air toxic posing the largest potential risk from the 
refining industry. Since these facilities were not randomly selected, the experiences of these 
facilities, as described below, may not be representative of the industry as a whole. 
EPA revised the 2002 NEI after we selected our sample facilities and after we had conducted the 
majority of our field work.  We updated our analyses to reflect the revised NEI emissions (i.e., 
Version 3) as described in the following sections. 
40 

Facility A 
Facility A is one of the largest refineries in the United States, ranking in the top 10 percent in 
terms of capacity.  As of January 2006, Facility A had an operating capacity of almost 290,000 
barrels per day. The refinery is located on the Gulf of Mexico, and its primary products are low 
sulfur gasoline, diesel fuel, and jet fuel. An environmental engineer from Facility A told us that 
the refinery is located in an area that was designated as non-attainment in the 1980s under the 
National Ambient Air Quality Standards for ozone.  As a result, the facility already had 
significant controls in place when the MACT was implemented, and did not have to make a large 
number of changes to some of the refinery’s processes.  The engineer told us that in order to 
comply with the MACT, the facility added controls to its truck racks, which were undergoing an 
expansion, and upgraded controls on its storage tanks.  It also expanded and upgraded its LDAR 
controls and made adjustments to its startup, shutdown, and malfunction plan.   
This facility’s NEI Version 3 emissions show a decrease in emissions from 1990 to 2002 for 9 of 
the 10 air toxics targeted by the Petroleum Refinery MACT.  Reported decreases in the 9 
pollutants ranged from about 15 percent to 98 percent,19 with emissions of 8 of the 10 targeted 
air toxics reduced by more than 50 percent.  We were unable to determine if emissions of 
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane decreased due to missing data in the 2002 NEI.  This facility’s updated 
2002 NEI Version 3 emissions are relatively consistent with the facility’s TRI-reported 
emissions.  Benzene emissions do not show a marked decrease from 1990 levels.  According to a 
facility engineer, the refinery made expansions in the mid-1990s that involved benzene sources.  
He also told us that after 2001, the refinery began identifying and reporting more leaks under 
LDAR, which includes benzene emissions.   
The following table shows 1990 NEI, 2002 NEI (Versions 1 and 3), and 2002 TRI-reported 
emissions for all targeted pollutants. 
19 1990 NEI compared to 2002 NEI Version 3. 
41 

Table D-2: Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for Facility A20 
Targeted Air Toxic a 
1990 NEI b 
2002 NEI 
Version 1 b 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 b 
Percent 
Reductionf 
2002 TRI b 
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane 
204.3 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Benzene 
54.4 
55.8 
46.4 
14.7% 
44.0 
Cresol c 
4.6 
0.1 
0.1 
97.8% 
0.1 
Ethylbenzene 
27.7 
11.5 
10.0 
63.9% 
10.7 
Hexane d 
214.8 
11.7 
8.0 
96.3% 
6.8 
Methyl Tert Butyl Ether 
28.6 
20.6 
13.9 
51.4% 
10.6 
Naphthalene 
6.8 
1.0 
0.8 
88.2% 
0.8 
Phenol 
1.7 
0.2 
0.1 
94.1% 
0.2 
Toluene 
127.0 
35.0 
29.2 
77.0% 
30.8 
Xylenes e 
195.6 
178.3 
130.3 
33.4% 
44.5 
a Primary air toxics targeted by the Petroleum Refinery MACT per the Federal Register.   
b Tons per year.  
c TRI amount represents Cresols (Mixed Isomers).  
d TRI amount represents n-Hexane.  
e TRI amount represents  Xylenes (Mixed Isomers).  
f  1990 NEI compared to 2002 NEI Version 3. 
NA= Reported emissions not available for this air toxic. 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI and TRI databases 
Facility B 
Facility B is a mid-sized refinery with a capacity of about 112,000 barrels per day.  It is located 
in the Midwest, and its primary products include gasoline and diesel fuels.  The facility was 
purchased out of bankruptcy by the current owners in 2004.  Officials from the facility told us 
they were not employed by the refinery at the time the Petroleum Refinery MACT standard was 
implemented.  Based on facility records and discussions with other employees, they believe the 
previous owners took several actions to comply with the MACT.  These actions included: 
• Rebuilding the loading rack and installing vapor controls;  
• Adding a flare to the coker, and modifying a number of atmospheric vents so that 
emissions were treated and sent to the coker flare;  
• Increasing LDAR monitoring; and  
• Stopping the discharge of slop oil into the sewer, which resulted in a significant drop in 
air toxics emissions. 
The facility’s NEI emissions data show that 2 of the 10 targeted air toxics increased from 1990 to 
2002, while 5 of the 10 decreased. Data for 3 of the 10 targeted air toxics are missing and thus 
we were unable to determine if emissions decreased for these pollutants.  Benzene emissions 
increased slightly during this period, and hexane emissions increased by over 47 percent.  
Refinery officials attributed the increase in these pollutants to an increase in production at the 
facility in 1998. For the 5 targeted air toxics showing emissions decreases, reductions ranged 
from about 83 percent to 99 percent.  The refinery official attributed this overall decrease to a 
20 The name of Facility A changed between the 1990 and 2002 NEI.  We included emissions only from those records 
that matched according to the State Facility Identification or the Federal Registry Identification in the different 
inventories. 
42 

 
combination of factors, including permitting, offsets to avoid triggering Prevention of Significant 
Deterioration requirements, and the MACT standard. 
The following table shows 1990 NEI, 2002 NEI (Versions 1 and 3), and 2002 TRI-reported 
emissions for all targeted pollutants. 
Table D-3: Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for Facility B 
Targeted Air Toxic a 
1990 NEI b 
2002 NEI 
Version 1 b 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 b 
Percent 
Reduction e 
2002 TRI 
b 
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane 
97.4 
0.8 
0.8 
99.2% 
NA 
Benzene 
25.9 
26.1 
26.1 
(+ .8%) 
26.2 
Cresol 
NA 
NA 
NA
 
NA 
Ethylbenzene 
13.2 
0.1 
0.1 
99.2% 
0.1 
Hexane c 
102.4 
150.9 
150.9 
(+ 47.4%) 
157.5 
Methyl Tert Butyl Ether 
13.7 
NA 
NA
 
NA 
Naphthalene 
3.2 
0.1 
0.1 
96.9% 
NA 
Phenol 
0.8 
NA 
NA
 
NA 
Toluene 
60.5 
6.3 
6.3 
89.6% 
6.3 
Xylenes d 
51.4 
16.7 
8.7 
83.1% 
8.7 
a Primary air toxics targeted by the Petroleum Refinery MACT per the Federal Register.      
b Tons per year.  
c TRI amount represents n-Hexane.  
d TRI amount represents Xylenes (Mixed Isomers).  
e 1990 NEI compared to 2002 NEI Version 3.  
NA = Reported emissions not available for this air toxic.  
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI and TRI databases 
Facility C 
Facility C is one of the largest refineries in the United States, ranking in the top 10 percent in 
terms of capacity.  As of January 2006, Facility C had an operating capacity of 330,000 barrels 
per day. The refinery is located on the Gulf of Mexico, and its primary products are gasoline, jet 
fuel, and diesel fuel. 
Officials from Facility C told us they took a number of actions in order to comply with the 
Petroleum Refinery MACT standard.  These actions included: 
• Installing seals on their floating roof racks; 
• Adding a water scrubber to a process vent; 
• Installing closed loop sampling systems; 
• Implementing LDAR requirements at a number of emission units; and 
• Installing a lean absorption system to comply with the Marine Vessel Loading MACT 
(Subpart Y), which is incorporated into the Petroleum Refinery MACT. 
According to the NEI, emissions of 9 of the 10 air toxics targeted by the MACT decreased 
between 1990 and 2002. We were unable to determine if emissions of cresol decreased because 
of missing data.  Benzene emissions from Facility C decreased significantly between 1990 and 
2002, from 128.4 tons to 37.1 tons (about 71 percent).  Reductions for the other air toxics 
43 

targeted by the MACT ranged from about 1 percent to nearly 100 percent.  Emissions of eight of 
the targeted air toxics decreased by more than 50 percent. 
However, it is possible that emissions decreased even more than is indicated by the NEI since the 
NEI emissions for 2002 are based on the facility’s potential to emit (i.e., the maximum level of 
emissions the facility could emit) for that year, rather than actual emissions.  State agency staff 
who provided the NEI emissions data to EPA told us that they did not have the facility’s actual 
emissions data for 2002.  Instead, they reported the facility’s potential to emit.  The facility’s 
2002 TRI-reported emissions were considerably lower than the 2002 NEI emissions for the 
targeted air toxics we compared. 
The following table shows 1990 NEI, 2002 NEI (Versions 1 and 3), and 2002 TRI-reported 
emissions for all targeted pollutants. 
Table D-4: Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for Facility C 
Targeted Air Toxic a 
1990 NEI b 
2002 NEI 
Version 1 b 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 b 
Percent 
Reduction e 
2002 TRI b 
2,2,4-Trimethylpentane 
482.2 
2.3 
2.3 
99.5% 
NA 
Benzene 
128.4 
37.1 
37.1 
71.1% 
27.0 
Cresol 
NA 
0.0 
0.0 
57.9% 
0.0 
Ethylbenzene 
65.3 
27.5 
27.5 
37.8% 
8.8 
Hexanec 
507.0 
90.5 
90.5 
82.1% 
52.5 
Methyl Tert Butyl Ether 
67.6 
4.8 
4.8 
92.9% 
NA 
Naphthalene 
16.0 
2.1 
2.1 
86.9% 
1.7 
Phenol 
4.0 
0.0 
0.0 
100.0% 
0.0 
Toluene 
299.7 
122.2 
122.2 
59.2% 
43.5 
Xylenesd 
492.1 
488.9 
488.9 
0.7% 
103.4 
a Primary air toxics targeted by the Petroleum Refinery MACT per the Federal Register.   
b Tons per year.  
c TRI amount represents n-Hexane.  
d TRI amount represents sum of m-Xylene, o-Xylene, and p-Xylene.  
e 1990 NEI compared to 2002 NEI Version 3.  
NA = Reported emissions not available for this air toxic.  
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI and TRI databases 
44 

 
Appendix E 
Detailed Results - Primary Aluminum MACT 
The United States aluminum supply is comprised of three basic sources: 
• Primary aluminum (domestic production from ore material);  
• Imported aluminum (of primary and secondary ingot and mill products); and 
• Recycled aluminum (metal recovered from scrap, also known as secondary recovery). 
Companies in the primary aluminum industry are primarily engaged in making aluminum from 
alumina.  Alumina is refined from bauxite ore.  The companies in this industry may also roll, 
draw, extrude, or cast the aluminum they make into primary forms.  These forms can be bars, 
billets, ingots, plates, rods, sheets, or strip.  Companies in this industry may make primary 
aluminum or aluminum-based alloys from alumina. 
The intent of the 1997 Primary Aluminum MACT was to reduce emissions of the two targeted 
air toxics, hydrogen fluoride and POM.  Facilities were expected to be in compliance by October 
7, 1999. The MACT added extensive monitoring and reporting requirements.  Monitoring 
requirements included: 
• Monthly measurements of total fluorides secondary emissions (unless one obtains a 
monitoring alternative) with annual measurements of primary emissions; 
• Quarterly measurements of POM secondary emissions from each Soderberg potline with 
annual measurements of primary emissions; 
• Continuous parameter monitoring system (e.g., scrubber air flow rate, dry alumna flow 
rate, water flow rate, voltage, etc.) for each emission control device; and 
• Monitoring device(s) to determine the daily weight of aluminum produced.  
Reporting requirements included: 
• 
Start-up, shutdowns, and malfunctions reports; 
• 
Annual reports on performance tests done after the initial performance test; and 
• 
Semi-annual excess emissions reports. 
Aggregate and Targeted Air Toxics for the Primary Aluminum Industry Decreased 
Between 1990 and 2002 
NEI data indicates that hydrogen fluoride and two subcategories of POM (PAH 7 and PAH 15) 
emissions declined for this MACT sector between 1990 and 2002.  Hydrogen fluoride emissions 
decreased by 27.6 percent. PAH 15 emissions decreased by 91.4 percent, and PAH 7 emissions 
declined by 94.5 percent. For hydrogen fluoride, this is less than the reduction EPA estimated 
for total fluorides when it issued the Primary Aluminum MACT standards.  EPA had estimated 
45 

that total fluoride emissions would decrease by 46 percent.  EPA estimated an approximately 
91 percent decrease in POMs, which includes PAH 15 and PAH 7.21 
Table E-1: NEI Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for the Primary Aluminum MACT 
Targeted Air Toxic a 
1990 NEI b 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 b 
Change 
(2002-1990) b 
Percent 
Change b 
Hydrogen Fluoride 
2,476.00 
1,792.30 
-683.7 
-28% 
PAH c  15 
427.5 
36.7 
-390.7 
-91% 
PAH c  7 
274.2 
15.3 
-258.9 
-94% 
Totals 
2,903.5 
1,829.0 
1,074.50 
-37% 
a Primary air toxics targeted by the MACT per the Federal Register. 
b Tons per year.  
c Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.  
d  Total represents the sum of Hydrogen Fluoride and PAH 15 since PAH 7 is a subset of PAH 15. 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI databases 
Decreases in Production and Changes in Emission Reporting Impact Emission 
Trends 
Two unrelated factors should be considered in analyzing emission trends for the primary 
aluminum industry.  First, there was a decline in U.S. capacity and production, which would be 
expected to cause industry-wide emissions to decrease.  Second, industry representatives told us 
that the methodology used to estimate emissions for TRI reporting was revised after the MACT 
implementation date in 1999 because company officials realized they could provide more 
accurate emissions data.  Company representatives told us that prior to the implementation of the 
Primary Aluminum MACT, their company relied on emissions factors to estimate emissions.  
Following the implementation of the MACT, more reliable monitoring became available.  The 
representatives told us that they discovered that the use of the emissions factors resulted in the 
underreporting of emissions.  A change in methodology to estimate emissions complicates 
analyzing emissions trends.  We do not know the extent to which reliable methodologies were 
used to develop a facility’s emissions total in the NEI.  EPA representatives told us that the NEI 
does not always identify the methodology used to calculate the amount of emissions.  If a less 
reliable methodology, such as an emission factor, is still being used in the current NEI, it could 
result in underreporting of emissions.   
Downward Trend in Capacity and Production in the Industry 
The primary aluminum industry is subject to world markets, and United States production has 
decreased between 1990 and 2002.  According to the Vice President for Environmental Health 
and Safety of the Aluminum Association, there has been a "dramatic downward trend" in U.S. 
capacity and production in the industry. Primary aluminum production decreased 33.1 percent 
from 1990 and 2002.  Between 1999, the compliance date of the MACT, and 2002, industry wide 
U.S. production decreased by 27.1 percent. 
  The Federal Register Notice for the Primary Aluminum MACT identified a 50-percent reduction in HAPs from 
11,000 tons per year to 5,500 tons per year.  EPA’s estimated HAPs and reductions are significantly more than the 
emissions in the NEI for 1990 and 2002. 
46 
21

 
These decreases in production are influenced by rising energy costs, particularly in the 
Northwest, where some facilities have shut down.  Since the compliance date of the MACT in 
1999, several facilities have closed temporarily or permanently.  According to the U.S. 
Geological Survey, in 1999, 23 primary aluminum facilities were in operation.  In contrast, in 
2002, 16 primary aluminum plants were in operation, and 7 were temporarily or permanently 
idled. At the end of 2002, about 1.5 million metric tons per year of domestic primary smelting 
capacity, equivalent to 35 percent of total capacity, was closed.
  Figure E-1: Primary Aluminum Production in the United States, 1990 - 2002 
Fi
gure
 E-1: 
Primar
y Alum
inum P
roduct
ion in
 the U
nited 
State
s, 19
90 - 
2002 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from U.S. Geological Survey data 
Improved Emission Estimates 
Improvements in the methodology for estimating emissions have impacted reported emissions 
trends since the MACT compliance date.  Prior to implementation of the MACT, industry 
facilities used emissions factors to estimate the amount of air toxics emitted by their facilities 
and reported in the TRI. However, the MACT required facilities to conduct self-monitoring and 
reporting. This additional monitoring resulted in companies obtaining more accurate information 
about their emissions.  Representatives from two of the three facilities we contacted told us that 
they revised their methodology for reporting emissions after the MACT was implemented.  They 
told us that the revised methodology resulted in higher reported emissions than what they had 
reported under the prior methodology.  
Results for Sample Facilities  
We selected the three facilities with the largest reported emissions of POM in the 2002 NEI 
(Version 1) for review. Since these facilities were not randomly selected their experiences may 
not be representative of the industry as a whole.  In particular, production at two of these 
facilities increased while production for the industry overall has decreased.  Further, NEI and 
47 

 
TRI data show an increase in hydrogen fluoride emissions for each of these three facilities.  This 
is contrary to overall industry trends, which indicate an overall decrease in hydrogen fluoride 
emissions.   
EPA revised the NEI after we selected our sample facilities, and had conducted the majority of 
our field work. We updated our analyses to reflect the revised NEI emissions (i.e., Version 3).  
However, the changes from Version 1 to Version 3 were minor and were not noticeable when the 
data was converted from pounds to tons. 
Facility D 
Facility D is an aluminum reduction plant built in 1979.  Company officials told us they have 
been operating at or near capacity since 1999.  Further, this facility was one of the best 
performing facilities in terms of emission rates when the MACT was developed.  Thus, this 
facility’s emission rates were used to establish the MACT floor for the entire industry.  In 
response to the MACT, the facility took steps to meet industrial ventilation criteria, installed 
parametric monitors to conduct continuous monitoring, added computers for data collection and 
reporting systems, and updated inspection practices. 
According to the NEI Version 3 data, hydrogen fluoride emissions increased from 20.4 to 
63.3 tons per year (210.3 percent) between 1990 and 2002 for this facility.  PAH-15 emissions 
decreased from 5.4 to 3.5 tons per year (35.2 percent) during the same time period.  We also 
compared the facility’s 2002 NEI emissions to the facility’s 2002 TRI self-reported emissions.  
The TRI-reported emissions for hydrogen fluoride were close to the number reported in NEI.   
Company officials could not explain the increase in EPA’s NEI emissions for hydrogen fluoride 
since they did not know how the NEI numbers were developed. We were unable to determine 
how the NEI emissions were developed.  An Agency official noted problems with the accuracy 
of the 1990 NEI. The company officials told us that their TRI-reported emissions have remained 
constant from 1997 through 2004. They told us that even though facility production has 
increased, reported emissions have remained constant.  Thus, the facility’s emission rate for 
hydrogen fluoride (amount of emissions per unit of production) has decreased.  Company 
officials told us that, in their opinion, the MACT has resulted in emissions reductions for the 
industry, particularly at the older facilities. 
The following table shows 1990 NEI, 2002 NEI (Versions 1 and 3), and 2002 TRI-reported 
emissions for all targeted pollutants. 
48 

Table E-2: Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for Facility D 
Targeted Air Toxics a 
1990 NEI b 
2002 NEI 
Version 1 b 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 b 
Percent 
Reduction d 
2002 TRI b 
PAH c 15 
5.4 
3.5 
3.5 
35.2% 
NA 
PAH c 7 
2.1 
3.5 
3.5 
(+66.7%) 
NA 
Hydrogen fluoride 
20.4 
63.3 
63.3 
(+210.3%) 
62.5 
Totals e 
25.8 
66.8 
66.8 
(+158.9%) 
Not 
Applicable 
a Primary air toxics targeted by the MACT per the Federal Register. 
b Tons per year. 
c Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. 
d 1990 NEI compared to 2002 NEI  Version 3. 
e  Total represents the sum of Hydrogen Fluoride and PAH 15 since PAH 7 is a subset of PAH 15. 
NA = Emissions for this subcategory of polycyclic organic matter is not available in the TRI. 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI databases 
Facility E 
Facility E is an aluminum reduction plant built in 1957.  According to facility representatives, 
they made several changes in response to the 1997 Primary Aluminum MACT.  For example, 
they installed a pitch fume scrubber, started daily testing, and maintained daily logs.  Facility 
representatives told us they switched from using pencil pitch to liquid pitch around 1999-2000 
and this resulted in a substantial reduction in polycyclic aromatic compounds.22  The change in 
pitch type reduced fugitive emissions.  
This facility’s hydrogen fluoride emissions increased from 74.7 to 119.2 tons per year 
(59.6 percent) between 1990 and 2002, according to the NEI, and the facility’s PAH-15 
emissions decreased from 20 to 8.4 tons per year (58 percent) between 1990 and 2002.  We also 
compared the facility’s 2002 NEI emissions to the facility’s 2002 TRI self-reported emissions.  
The reported emissions for hydrogen fluoride were very similar in both databases.   
Facility E representatives told us that the company changed the way TRI-reported emissions 
were calculated, resulting in higher emission estimates despite installing additional controls.  
Earlier, Facility E used AP-42 emissions factors to calculate its TRI emissions, but in 2001 
changed to collecting actual emissions data from monitoring.  They found that estimated 
emissions based on emissions factors were “a little bit lower” than emissions based on 
monitoring data. The company also reported confusion about reporting polycyclic aromatic 
compounds in the TRI.  In their opinion, the MACT reduced emissions because it forced them to 
pay more attention to daily compliance and fugitive emissions.  
The following table shows 1990 NEI, 2002 NEI (Versions 1 and 3), and 2002 TRI-reported 
emissions for all targeted pollutants. 
22 Polycyclic aromatic compounds include PAH 7 and PAH 15 and are reported in the TRI. 
49 

c  
Table E-3: Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for Facility E 
Targeted Air Toxic a 
1990 NEI 
2002 NEI 
Version 1 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 
Percent 
Reductiond 
2002 TRI 
PAH c 15 
20 
8.4 
8.4 
58.0% 
NA 
PAH c 7 
7.8 
8.4 
8.4 
(+7.7%) 
NA 
Hydrogen fluoride 
74.7 
119.2 
119.2 
(+59.6%) 
119.3 
Totals e 
94.7 
127.6 
127.6 
(+34.7%) 
Not 
Applicable 
a Primary air toxics targeted by the MACT per the Federal Register. 
b Tons per year. 
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons. 
d 1990 NEI compared to 2002 NEI Version 3. 
e Total represents the sum of Hydrogen Fluoride and PAH 15 since PAH 7 is a subset of PAH 15. 
NA = Emissions for this subcategory of polycyclic organic matter is not available in the TRI. 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI and TRI databases 
Facility F 
Facility F is an aluminum reduction plant that started producing aluminum in 1971.  According 
to facility officials, production at their plant has increased 14 percent since 1999.  They told us 
that in response to the MACT, they (1) installed a scrubber on their carbon based oven, 
(2) modified bag houses, (3) and implemented monitoring methods.    
Based on the NEI data, hydrogen fluoride emissions increased from 88.4 to 143.1 tons per year 
(61.9 percent) between 1990 and 2002.  The facility’s PAH-15 emissions decreased during this 
period from 23.6 to 6.8 tons per year (71.2 percent), according to NEI data.  We also compared 
the facility’s 2002 NEI emissions to the facility’s TRI self-reported emissions.  The TRI-reported 
emissions were slightly less than the amount in the NEI.    
Facility F representatives told us that their method for reporting hydrogen fluoride emissions in 
TRI has improved since 1990.  They are now using actual emissions testing data rather than 
emissions factors.  These officials told us that emissions of hydrogen fluoride were 
underreported until they started using testing data to report emissions.  They also noted that there 
was some confusion in the past regarding the reporting of polycyclic aromatic compound 
numbers.  In their opinion, the MACT reduced emissions for this industry since the majority 
facilities within the industry had to make changes to come into compliance. 
The following table shows 1990 NEI, 2002 NEI (Versions 1 and 3), and 2002 TRI-reported 
emissions for all targeted pollutants. 
50 

Table E-4: Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for Facility F 
Targeted Air Toxic a 
1990 NEI b 
2002 NEI b 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 b 
Percent 
Reduction d 
2002 TRI b 
PAHc 15 
23.6 
6.8 
6.8 
71.2% 
NA 
PAHc 7 
9.2 
6.8 
6.8 
26.1% 
NA 
Hydrogen fluoride 
88.4 
143.1 
143.1 
(+61.9%) 
136.2 
Totals e 
112.0 
149.9 
149.9 
71.2% 
Not 
Applicable 
a Primary air toxics targeted by the MACT per the Federal Register. 
b Tons per year.  
c Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons.  
d 1990 NEI compared to 2002 NEI Version 3.  
e Total represents the sum of Hydrogen Fluoride and PAH 15 since PAH 7 is a subset of PAH 15. 
NA = Emissions for this subcategory of polycyclic organic matter is not available in the TRI. 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI and TRI databases 
51 

Appendix F 
Detailed Results - Pulp and Paper MACT 
The Pulp and Paper MACT category includes two types of mills: (1) mills that process raw wood 
fiber or recycled fiber to make pulp and/or paper; and (2) mills that convert pulp and paper into 
more specialized products such as paperboard boxes, writing paper, and sanitary paper. Pulp and 
paper production involves both combustion processes and non-combustion processes.  The Pulp 
and Paper MACT (MACTs I and III)23 apply to non-combustion sources of pulp and paper 
production. MACT I establishes controls for air toxics emissions from mills using the kraft, 
sulfite, semi-chemical, and soda pulping processes.  MACT III establishes controls for air toxics 
emissions from mills using mechanical, secondary fiber, and non-wood pulping, and 
papermaking systems at all mills.   
The 1998 Pulp and Paper MACT established separate emission limits for pulping system vents, 
pulping process condensate streams, and bleaching systems. MACT I and MACT III provide 
several alternative emission limits for the pulping vent standard, pulping condensates standard, 
and bleaching system standard.  For each regulated emission point, a mill can choose the 
emission limit it will comply with and can use any emission control technology to achieve 
compliance.  In general, mills must conduct an initial performance test and then continuously 
monitor a set of control devices or process operating parameters.  Exceeding a monitoring 
parameter constitutes a violation of the standard.  Mills must continuously monitor operating 
parameters and report all instances where the values deviate from the maximum or minimum 
values established during the initial performance test.   
The Pulp and Paper MACT targets 13 air toxics that are included in EPA’s list of the 33 highest 
priority air toxics. These include acetaldehyde, acrolein, carbon tetrachloride, chloroform, 
formaldehyde, and methylene chloride, among others.   Formaldehyde is estimated to present the 
most risk to public health from the pulp and paper production industry. 
NEI Data Shows Significant Decrease in Air Toxics Emissions 
According to the NEI, from 1990 to 2002, air toxics emissions from pulp and paper facilities 
decreased from 213,652 tons to 21,455 tons (90 percent).  When EPA developed the Pulp and 
Paper MACT it estimated that these standards would reduce emissions by 64 percent.  Emissions 
for the 13 air toxics specifically targeted by the Pulp and Paper MACT have also decreased.  The 
following table shows the emission changes for targeted pollutants from 1990 to 2002, based on 
the NEI. 
23 MACT II (subpart MM) covers chemical production for the pulp and paper industry and had a compliance date in 
2004.  Our review did not include this MACT since we limited our review to those MACTs with compliance dates 
prior to 2002 
52 

Table F-1: NEI Emissions of Target Air Toxics for the Pulp and Paper MACT 
Targeted  Air Toxic a 
1990 NEI b 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 b 
Change b 
(2002-1990) 
Percent 
Change 
1,2,4-Trichlorobenzene 
5,710.0 
74.6 
5,635..4 
-98.7% 
Acetaldehyde 
10,921.1 
1,432.8 
9,488.3 
-86.9% 
Acrolein 
283.0 
55.5 
227.5 
-80.4% 
Carbon Tetrachloride 
4,270.0 
54.9 
4,215.1 
-98.7% 
Chloroform 
18,500.1 
463.5 
18,036.6 
-97.5% 
Cresol/Cresylic Acid 
(Mixed Isomers) 
NA 
NA 
Cumene 
8,270.0 
16.0 
8,254.0 
-99.8% 
Formaldehyde 
4,124.4 
196.4 
3,928.0 
-95.2% 
Methanol 
152,292.9 
18,959.3 
133,333.6 
-87.6% 
Methylene Chloride 
(Dichloromethane) 
1,740.0 
79.6 
1,660.4 
-95.4% 
Phenol 
3,060.0 
68.0 
2,992.0 
-97.8% 
Propionaldehyde 
2,040.0 
11.1 
2,028.9 
-99.5% 
Xylenes (Mixed Isomers) 
2,440.0 
43.3 
2,396.7 
-98.2% 
Totals 
213,651.5 
21,455.0 
192,196.5 
-90.0% 
a Primary air toxics targeted by the MACT per the Federal Register. 
b Tons per year. 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI database 
We did not determine the extent to which these emissions were attributed to the MACT rules.  
As explained below, decreases in production had an impact on overall emissions. 
Decreases in Production May Have Impacted Overall Emissions 
A decrease in U.S. production of paper and paperboard products was one possible reason for an 
overall decline in air toxics emissions from this industry.  Between 1997 and 2000, U.S. exports 
of paper and paperboard products declined 5.5 percent, while imports increased 20 percent.  
Capital investments in recent years were well below historic levels, and no new mills have been 
built in the United States since 1970.  For the first time, U.S. industry capacity declined in 2001. 
Review of Sample Facilities 
We selected the three facilities with the largest reported emissions of formaldehyde in the 2002 
NEI (Version 1) for review. These three pulp and paper mills represent three industry 
components: pulp mills, paper mills, and paperboard mills.  Since these facilities were not 
randomly selected, the experiences of these facilities may not be representative of the industry as 
a whole. 
Pulp and Paper emissions were not affected by the update from NEI Version 1 to Version 3.   
Facility G 
Facility G is a paperboard mill.  Facility G managers told us that changes in emission calculation 
methods and increases in production were two non-MACT related factors that impacted air 
toxics emissions.  Facility G was granted a 1-year extension to comply with Phase 1 of the 
53 

MACT standard, resulting in a compliance date of April 16, 2002.  Managers told us that Facility 
G made several changes to the mill to comply with the MACT.  In 2001, Facility G installed a 
stream stripper, made improvements to its thermal oxidizer, and made minor improvements to 
the non-condensable gas collection system.  In 2003, changes were made to the washer system to 
comply with Phase 2 of the MACT.  Facility G used the Clean Condensate Alternative, shower 
water improvements and changes to the tanks and piping were made, and it began using cleaner 
water in the shower water system, which helped reduce the amount of methanol emissions in the 
wastewater. 
According to the NEI, emissions of targeted air toxics decreased significantly for this facility 
from 1990 to 2002.  We also compared the facility’s 2002 NEI emissions to the facility’s self-
reported emissions in TRI.  The TRI-reported emissions were greater for two pollutants: 
acetaldehyde and formaldehyde.  However, NEI 2002 methanol emissions were greater than 
TRI-reported emission by more than 500 tons per year.    
Facility G managers told us that they had made significant changes in their method for 
calculating TRI-reported emissions since 1999.  Specifically, emissions factors for methanol and 
other air toxics have changed, and industry guidelines for calculating emissions have improved 
over the years making them more accurate.  In their estimation, the majority of the emissions 
changes have resulted in decreased reported emissions, since the old emissions factors over
estimated emissions.  However, any decreases in emissions at Facility G resulting from changes 
in emissions factors may have been offset by increases in production.  The following table shows 
1990 NEI, 2002 NEI (Versions 1 and 3), and 2002 TRI-reported emissions for all targeted 
pollutants. 
Table F-2: Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for Facility G  
Targeted Air Toxic a 
1990 NEI b 
2002 NEI 
Version 1 b 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 b 
Percent 
Reduction c 
2002 TRI b 
1,2,4
Trichlorobenzene 
176.2 
8.2 
8.2 
95.3% 
NA 
Acetaldehyde 
333.1 
38.9 
38.9 
88.3% 
49.9 
Acrolein 
8.6 
4.0 
4.0 
53.5% 
NA 
Carbon Tetrachloride 
130.2 
12.1 
12.1 
90.7% 
NA 
Chloroform 
563.9 
10.4 
10.4 
98.2% 
NA 
Cumene 
255.3 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Formaldehyde 
125.8 
17.1 
17.1 
86.4% 
37.8 
Methanol 
4,691.7 
1642.8 
1642.8 
65.0% 
1,068.2 
Methylene Chloride 
53.0 
4.1 
4.1 
92.3% 
NA 
O-Cresol 
NA 
NA 
NA 
NA  
NA 
Phenol 
94.5 
1.1 
1.1 
1.1 
1.3 
Propionaldehyde 
63.0 
NA 
NA 
NA  
NA 
a Primary air toxics targeted by the MACT per the Federal Register. 
b Tons per year.  
c 1990 NEI compared to 2002 NEI Version 3.  
NA = Reported emissions not available for this air toxic.  
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI and TRI databases 
54 

Facility H 
Facility H is a paper and paperboard mill.  Facility H managers told us they had to make process 
and control changes to comply with the MACT.  Initially the stripper-off gas systems from the 
steam stripper were incinerated in the lime kiln.  However, variability in the stripper-off gases 
thermal value caused swings in the lime kiln, which resulted in damage to the kiln.  Facility H 
installed a methanol liquefaction system to condense the stripper-off gases and burn the 
methanol in the recovery boilers.   
According to the NEI, emissions of targeted air toxics decreased significantly for this facility 
from 1990 to 2002.  We also compared the facility’s 2002 NEI emissions to the facility’s TRI 
self-reported emissions.  The 2002 emissions data from the NEI and TRI were very consistent for 
this facility. The following table shows 1990 NEI, 2002 NEI (Versions 1 and 3), and 2002 TRI-
reported emissions for all targeted pollutants. 
Table F-3: Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for Facility H  
Targeted Air Toxic a 
1990 NEI b c 
2002 NEI 
Version 1 b c 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 b c 
Percent 
Reduction d 
2002 TRI b 
1,2,4
Trichlorobenzene 
94.5 
3.3 
3.3 
96.5% 
NA 
Acetaldehyde 
211.4 
77.0 
77.0 
63.6% 
77.0 
Acrolein 
4.6 
3.5 
3.5 
23.9% 
NA 
Carbon Tetrachloride 
69.8 
0.1 
0.1 
99.9% 
NA 
Chloroform 
302.4 
NA
 NA
 
NA 
Cumene 
136.9 
0.5 
0.5 
99.6% 
NA 
Formaldehyde 
67.4 
14.8 
14.8 
78.0% 
14.8 
Methanol 
2,731.4 
892.9 
892.9 
67.3% 
892.9 
Methylene Chloride 
28.4 
NA 
NA
 
NA 
O-Cresol 
NA 
NA
 
NA 
Phenol 
50.6 
3.6 
3.6 
92.9% 
3.6 
Propionaldehyde 
33.8 
0.2 
0.2 
99.4% 
NA 
a Primary air toxics targeted by the MACT per the Federal Register. 
b Tons per year.    
C The NEI emissions include totals from two different Pulp and Paper MACT codes: 1626-1 (subpart S)  
and 1626-2 (subpart M).  In the 1990 NEI and the 2002 NEI Version 1, the majority of emissions for this 
facility were included in the 1626-1 code.  However, in the 2002 NEI Version 3, the majority of 
emissions were included in the 1626-2 code.  For this facility, we combined emissions from both codes 
in the NEI emissions figures. 
d 1990 NEI compared to 2002 NEI Version 3. 
NA= Reported emissions not available for this air toxic. 
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI and TRI databases 
Facility I 
Facility I is a pulp mill that produces cellulose fibers.  According to the NEI, emissions of 
targeted air toxics decreased significantly for this facility from 1990 to 2002.  However, the data 
from the 2002 NEI appeared questionable since the reported emissions for three pollutants 
(acetaldehyde, formaldehyde, and methanol) were the same.  Further, the NEI emissions were 
significantly lower than TRI reported emissions for two of the pollutants.   
55 

Despite repeated attempts, we were unable to schedule a meeting with representatives from this 
facility to discuss the MACT’s impact on their facility’s emissions.  The following table shows 
1990 NEI, 2002 NEI (Versions 1 and 3), and 2002 TRI-reported emissions for all targeted 
pollutants. 
Table F-4: Emissions of Targeted Air Toxics for Facility I 
Targeted Air Toxic a 
1990 NEI b 
2002 NEI 
Version 1 b 
2002 NEI 
Version 3 b 
Percent 
Reduction d 
2002 TRI b 
1,2,4
Trichlorobenzene 
26.3 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Acetaldehyde 
49.7 
22.2 
22.2 
55.3% 
53.2 
Acrolein 
1.3 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Carbon Tetrachloride 
19.4 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Chloroform 
84.1 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Cumene 
38.1 
NA 
NA 
NA 
Formaldehyde 
18.8 
22.2 
22.2 
(+18.1%) 
7.6 
Methanol 
700.0 
22.2 
22.2 
96.8% 
188.2 
Methylene Chloride 
7.9 
22.2 
22.2 
(+181.0%) 
NA 
O-Cresolc 
NA 
NA 
NA
 
19.7 
Phenol 
14.1 
NA 
NA 
1.3 
Propionaldehyde 
9.4 
NA 
NA 
NA 
a Primary air toxics targeted by the MACT per the Federal Register. 
b Tons per year.  
CTRI amount represents Cresol (Mixed Isomers).   
d1990 NEI compared to 2002 NEI Version 3.  
NA= Reported emissions not available for this air toxic.   
Source: Developed by OIG staff from NEI and TRI databases 
56 

Appendix G 
MACT Compliance Monitoring, Enforcement, 
and Compliance Assistance Activities 
Our evaluation objectives included the following questions: 
• Is there a relationship between the quantity and quality of compliance monitoring and 
enforcement and the effectiveness of MACT standards in achieving the desired emissions 
reductions? 
• Is there a relationship between the adequacy of compliance assistance tools and the 
effectiveness of MACT standards in achieving the desired emissions reductions?   
Limitations to the amount and quality of data regarding compliance monitoring and compliance 
assistance activities prevented us from quantitatively assessing the impact of these activities on 
MACT effectiveness.  Instead we reviewed results from previous studies and initiatives, and 
discussed the impact of these activities on MACT effectiveness with representatives from 
selected facilities and States.  The sections below discuss the results of our review. 
. 
Results of Statistically Valid Compliance Rate Studies  
We identified two statistically valid compliance rate studies that have been conducted for MACT 
industries, one by EPA and the other by the California Air Resources Board.  Both of these 
studies found high noncompliance rates for their respective industries.   
In Fiscal Year 2002, EPA conducted a statistically valid study of compliance with the Ethylene 
Oxide Sterilizer MACT. This is the only statistically valid study EPA has conducted for the 
MACT standards. Generally, sources that operate ethylene oxide sterilizers are smaller 
stationary sources that sterilize or fumigate medical supplies, pharmaceuticals, and/or spices.  
EPA randomly selected 70 facilities to inspect out of a universe of 222 facilities.  The study 
found that 50.8 percent of the selected facilities were out of compliance with the MACT 
standard. 
In a statistically valid study conducted in 1999 and 2000, the California Air Resources Board 
found significant noncompliance with California’s Chrome Plating Airborne Toxic Control 
Measure, the State’s equivalent to the Federal Chrome Electroplating MACT.  Inspectors in five 
air districts conducted on-site inspections of 188 chrome platers and found 73 percent of them 
had some type of violation.  The majority of the violations pertained to monitoring, 
recordkeeping, and reporting: 68 percent of the facilities had a non-emission-related violation; 
39 percent had an emission-related violation (a violation that could potentially result in an 
emission exceedance); and 8 percent had a direct excess emission violation (an emission 
exceedance witnessed by the inspector).   
In a followup to the Chrome Plating compliance rate study, the California Air Resources Board 
and the individual air districts conducted a number of targeted compliance-related activities for 
57 

the chrome platers in the study.  After conducting these permitting, training, enforcement, and 
outreach activities, the facilities were inspected again in 2003.  The California Air Resources 
Board found that the noncompliance rate at these facilities had decreased from 78 percent in 
1999-2000 to 14 percent in 2003. 
EPA’s Targeted MACT Initiatives Have Found Noncompliance with MACT 
Standards 
OECA has included air toxics as a National Enforcement Priority since Fiscal Year 2000.  For 
the planning cycle Fiscal Years 2005-2007, OECA implemented an air toxics initiative in which 
each region selects MACT source categories for targeted compliance investigations and 
enforcement.  EPA’s original goal under this initiative was to achieve air toxics emissions 
reductions of 12,000 pounds each year from these targeted MACTs, for a total reduction of 
36,000 pounds by the end of Fiscal Year 2007. However, reported emissions reductions for 
Fiscal Years 2005 and 2006 under the initiative have greatly exceeded this goal.  In Fiscal Year 
2005, total reported air toxics emission reductions from regionally targeted cases were 332,000 
pounds; for Fiscal Year 2006, they were 356,000 pounds. Most of the violations and resulting 
emissions reductions were from facilities subject to the Secondary Aluminum MACT, the 
Hazardous Organic NESHAP, and the Pharmaceutical MACT. 
Based on its enforcement activity in Fiscal Years 2004-2005 related to the national air toxics 
strategy, EPA found significant noncompliance with the LDAR requirements of the MACT 
standards. Twenty-two MACTs, including the Petroleum Refining MACT and the Hazardous 
Organic NESHAP, have LDAR requirements.  In response to this noncompliance, OECA is 
conducting a national targeted initiative in Fiscal Year 2006-2007 to focus on MACT equipment 
leak requirements. 
Impact of Self-Monitoring and Reporting Requirements on Compliance and 
Emissions Reductions 
Representatives from five of the eight sampled facilities we interviewed told us that self-
monitoring requirements were important to achieving compliance with MACT requirements and 
gaining emissions reductions.  In general, the facility representatives we spoke with told us that 
internal compliance monitoring, rather than State-conducted on-site inspections, is what drives 
compliance and emissions reductions.  They told us that the self-monitoring required by the 
MACT standard can help a facility identify a problem before it becomes a violation, and can help 
ensure that the facility fixes problems more quickly.   
The only MACT violations at the nine sample facilities we reviewed were discovered through 
internal facility monitoring and self-reported by the facilities to State agencies.  All three of the 
primary aluminum facilities have reported violations to the State, two for emissions exceedances 
and one for failure to record startup and shutdown events.  One of the petroleum refineries also 
self-reported violations pertaining to startup and shutdown maintenance.   
Industry representatives told us that self-reporting requirements enable regulatory agencies to 
become aware of MACT violations that they otherwise may not detect.  For example, one 
58 

refinery representative told us that finding violations would require review of the facility's 
extensive records, noting that there are about 250,000 components in the LDAR database alone.  
He said the State does not have the time or expertise to inspect at that degree of specificity.  
Compliance and enforcement staff from Kansas told us that self-reporting is very important 
because the State does not have the number of staff nor expertise to find every violation at 
petroleum refineries.  They said the refineries have more knowledge and expertise about their 
operations than Kansas’ inspectors, and this makes it difficult for them to determine if the facility 
is in compliance.  According to one Kansas staff member, the State has to have a lot of trust in 
the facility.  If a facility reports that it is in compliance, the State has to accept that unless their 
inspectors find otherwise. 
State and Industry Representatives Generally Find Compliance Assistance Useful  
EPA developed several compliance assistance tools for each of the three MACTs we selected for 
in-depth analysis. These tools24 include such documents as plain language guides, applicability 
flowcharts, and Questions and Answers documents. Six of the seven States and six of the eight 
facilities we spoke with had used one or more of EPA’s compliance assistance tools in 
implementing the three MACTs in our sample.  Representatives from the six States that used the 
tools, and from five of the six facilities that used the tools, said that they were useful for 
implementing the MACT.  The petroleum refinery representatives we spoke with said they found 
EPA’s Questions and Answers document particularly helpful.  
The results of EPA-conducted online surveys on the usefulness of its compliance assistance tools 
generally showed good results. In 2004 and 2005, EPA surveyed industry and regulators on the 
usefulness and effectiveness of EPA’s compliance assistance tools for four MACT standards: the 
Aerospace MACT, Plywood MACT, Reciprocating Internal Combustion Engines MACT, and 
Industrial Boiler MACT. In general, the surveys found that the tools were obtained and used by 
a large portion of the respondents.  Most of the tools were rated as "good" or "very good" in 
terms of usefulness by a majority of respondents.   
State agency staff and industry managers told us that compliance assistance tools could be 
improved in some areas.  For example, EPA did not issue some of the tools until after the 
compliance date of the MACT.  Representatives from three States told us that some of EPA's 
inspection checklists are of limited value because they cover too much information or are too 
complicated to use.  In addition, an official from one of the refineries told us that many of the 
tools are labeled "Draft" or included a disclaimer.  Thus the guidance may not be very helpful 
when it comes to inspections or enforcement.  For example, the Petroleum Refining MACT 
Standard Guidance contains a disclaimer that the document is only guidance and does not create 
any enforceable rights. 
24 A complete list of the tools developed by EPA for these three MACTs is located in Appendix G. 
59 

State Representatives Indicated that Compliance Assistance Is More Important 
for Smaller Facilities 
In general, State agency staff told us compliance assistance is most important and useful for 
smaller facilities.  They explained that smaller sources may not be accustomed to being 
regulated, and that compliance assistance can be critical for effective implementation of the 
standards at these facilities.  In contrast, larger facilities often have environmental staff to 
implement the regulations and are often members of industry associations that provide 
environmental compliance training. 
60 

Appendix H 
Compliance Assistance Tools Developed by EPA 
for Three Sample MACTs 
Petroleum Refinery MACT (Subpart CC) 
Petroleum MACT Standard Guidance – Revised to Include Rule Amendments (November 
2000) 
• Petroleum MACT Standard Guidance – Revised to Include Rule Amendments  
(November 2000).  This document includes:  
o An overview of the standard 
o A summary table of control requirements 
o Applicability flowcharts 
o A summary of testing, monitoring, and reporting requirements 
o A summary table of the overlap of the MACT with other regulations 
o Additional resources and contacts 
o A glossary of terms and definitions used in the standard 
o A summary of amendments to the standard 
• Summary of Testing, Monitoring, Recordkeeping, and Reporting Requirements of 
40 CFR 63 Subpart CC Petroleum Refineries NESHAP (November 2000) 
• Benzene NESHAP FAQ Handbook for Subparts BB and FF (September 1997) 
• Questions and Answers for the Refinery MACT I Rule (November 1998) 
• List of Petroleum Refineries Affected by the Petroleum Refineries Standards (September 
1997) 
• Petroleum Refinery MACT - Compliance Assistance/Inspection Checklist (November 
2000) 
• Petroleum Refinery MACT - Determining Applicability (November 2000) 
Primary Aluminum MACT (Subpart LL) 
• Plain Language Guide to the Primary Aluminum NESHAP (October 1999).  This  
document includes:  
o An overview of the standard 
o An applicability flowchart 
o A compliance timeline 
o Summary tables of monitoring, recordkeeping, and reporting requirements 
o A summary of test methods and calculations 
o A schedule of notification and reporting due dates 
o Example reports and notifications 
o Contacts for additional help and information 
o An index for the standard, cross-referenced to the Federal Register notice 
o A description of the primary aluminum process and emission points 
o A site-specific test plan 
61 

• Inspection Checklist – Primary Aluminum NESHAP (September 2001) 
• 1996 Primary Aluminum Source List 
Pulp and Paper MACT (Subpart S) 
• Pulping and Bleaching System NESHAP for the Pulp and Paper Industry: A Plain 
English Description (September 2001).  This document includes: 
o An overview of the standard 
o A list of Federal Register notices pertaining to the MACT 
o A description of the pulping and bleaching processes 
o Summary tables of monitoring, reporting, and recordkeeping requirements 
o A comparison of MACT and New Source Performance Standards requirements 
for pulp and paper sources 
o A summary of other air regulations affecting the pulp and paper industry 
• Summary Flow Diagrams of the Pulp and Paper MACT Standard (December 1997) 
• List of Pulp and Paper Mills Subject to Combined Air and Water Rules (EPA; September 
1997) 
• Questions and Answers (Q&A's) for Pulp and Paper NESHAP (September 1999) 
• Questions and Answers (Q&A's) for the Pulp and Paper NESHAP - Second Volume 
(March 2000) 
• Memo from OAQPS - Clean Condensate Alternative for the Pulp and Paper NESHAP 
(April 2004) 
• Letter from Region 4 - Pulp and Paper MACT Condensate Averaging Times (November 
1999) 
• Letter from Region 4 - Clarification of the Clean Condensate Alternative (March 2003) 
• EPA Office of Compliance Sector Notebook Project: Profile of the Pulp and Paper 
Industry – 2nd Edition (November 2002) 
62 

Appendix I 
Agency Response to the Draft Report 
OCT 23 2007 
MEMORANDUM 
SUBJECT: Comments of OIG Evaluation Report: “Improvements in Air Toxics 
Emissions Data Needed to Conduct Residual Risk Assessments” (OIG- 
 
Assignment No. 2005-001117) 
FROM: 
Robert J. Meyers 
Principal Deputy Assistant Administrator 
for Air and Radiation (6101A) 
TO: 
Wade T. Najjum 
Assistant Inspector General for Program Evaluation (2460T) 
We appreciate the opportunity to review and comment on the final Office of 
Inspector General (OIG) report entitled “Improvements in Air Toxics Emissions Data 
Needed to Conduct Residual Risk Assessments” (OIG-Assignment No. 2005-001117). 
The Office of Air and Radiation (OAR) disagrees with several conclusions reached by 
OIG as well as with OIG’s recommendations contained in the final report. Below, we 
explain our disagreements along with the activities we have underway to implement the 
recommendations. 
(1) 
3-1) We recommend that the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
develop data quality objectives for using NEI data in conducting residual 
 
risk assessments. 
Response: It is OAR’s view that quantifiable Data Quality Objectives (DQOs) or 
acceptance criteria for use of data within the National Emissions Inventory are not 
practicable or appropriate within the current assembly and use of the National 
Emissions lnventory (NEI).  To fulfill Agency mission goals and objectives using 
data of known quality, EPA programs develop and implement supporting quality 
systems.  The Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards (OAQPS) uses an 
applied Quality System, implemented through a formal Quality Management Plan 
(QMP), to manage the quality of its environmental data collection, generation, and 
use. To expedite these concepts, OAQPS’ QMP requires that projects meeting 
certain criteria are required to create Quality Assurance Project Plans (QAPP). 
63 

For the NEI, EPA uses a Quality System that is based on an acceptance process to 
determine if the inventory is suitable for the purpose(s) for which it is to be used.         
This process includes numerous quality reviews by both EPA and our State/local            
partners. These reviews are both automated (e.g., State IT system checks) and 
professionally evaluated by experts (e.g., EPA and State staff).  The review 
process generally incorporates multiple elements such as 1) data/information flow 
monitoring and checks; 2) clear decision points in the data flow; 3) decisions by 
professional experts in assessing data elements through mass balance calculations, 
statistical determinations, and other tools; and 4) data acceptance determinations regarding 
the usability of the data/information for the intended purpose. 
These reviews are documented in the plans for inventory development which are 
updated with each Inventory Cycle (e.g., 1999, 2002, and 2005).  For the NEI, 
project specific plans, similar to a QAPP, have been prepared at the beginning of 
each 3-year project cycle. Project specific documentation has served as an 
updated plan by specifying differences from the original plan for each finalized 
version of a project. The 2005 NET data plan development is located at 
http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/net/2005dataplan.html. 
Also, on the EPA CHIEF website 
(http://www.epa.gov/ttn/chief/net/2002inventory.html) are the other elements of the 
DQOs and QAPPs such as the Input formats, the Consolidated Emissions Reporting 
Rule, and Documentation of the 2002 NEI: 
In the future, as resources permit, EPA can work with our partners, EPA 
researchers, and the broader scientific community to identify and incorporate new,  
and possibly quantifiable, quality measures and acceptance criteria. At this time, 
quantifiable acceptance criteria for NEI data national data elements are not 
meaningful or useful.  EPA continues to improve the NEI and is currently 
developing a new data base to improve the timeliness and quality of data and 
reports from the NEI. As we work with our partners on improving the quality and 
consistency of data provided, we will continue to consider new Data Quality 
Objectives appropriate for the use of NEI data and information. 
(2)  
3-2) We also recommend that EPA establish requirements for State reporting 
of air toxics emissions data and compliance monitoring information. 
Response: While we agree that establishing requirements for reporting air toxics 
emissions data to the EPA could improve the quality of such data, we do not 
believe such requirements are appropriate at this time.  We arc currently revising 
the requirements for State reporting of criteria pollutant emissions to EPA in the  
Air Emissions Reporting Requirements rule.  These changes were proposed last 
year and we are currently considering public comments, including a comment on 
this issue. As this is a policy issue under consideration, it is premature to convey our 
program’s position on this issue. 
64 

We note that our current, evolving HAP emission inventory efforts should 
continue to improve progress in improving HAP emissions inventory data quality. 
Working with our State and local partners and industry, we believe these efforts 
can achieve the desired data quality results. The EPA has developed national 
level inventories of HAP emissions on a 3 year cycle since 1990. The success of 
EPA’s efforts rests in large measure on the cooperation of states in submitting 
HAP data to EPA to support the development of national HAP emission 
inventories. Each emission inventory cycle has benefited from increased state 
agency participation in submitting HAP data. We believe it will he possible to 
continue developing and improving national level HAP inventories using the 
cooperative approach employed to date but intend to closely monitor the 
participation of State agencies and industry in this effort. We also expect EPA’s 
new Emissions Inventory System (EIS), when completed, to improve HAP 
inventory quality. The EIS, by further automating data handling and analysis, and 
providing inventory transparency, will facilitate identification and resolution of 
both HAP and criteria pollutant inventory data issues. We understand and 
appreciate the objectives inherit in your recommendation regarding the need for a 
HAP data reporting rule. We may revisit this recommendation in the future 
should our voluntary efforts to improve this data not meet our program needs. 
     In closing, I would like to thank the Office of the Inspector General for working 
with us in developing the final report and offering its recommendations. If you have 
additional questions after reviewing this response and the documents cited therein, please 
do not hesitate to request a briefing. Thank you for the opportunity to formally respond 
to the recommendations contained in the Office of Inspector General (OIG) report 
entitled “Improvements in Air Toxics Emissions Data Needed to conduct Residual 
Risk Assessments. 
Attachment 
cc: 
 Pete Cosier, OAR Audit Follow-up Coordinator 
Michael Boucher, OAQPS Audit Follow-up Coordinator 
Rick Beusse, Director for Program Evaluation, Air Issues, OlG 
65 

Appendix J 
Distribution 
Office of the Administrator 
Principal Deputy Assistant Administrator for Air and Radiation 
Agency Followup Official (the CFO) 
Agency Followup Coordinator 
Office of General Counsel 
Associate Administrator for Congressional and Intergovernmental Relations  
Associate Administrator for Public Affairs  
Audit Followup Coordinator, Office of Air and Radiation 
Acting Inspector General 
66

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0096 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
~— FREEPORT-McMoRAN
Miami Operations
5701 New St, PO Box 4444, Claypool, AZ 85532-4444
January 24, 2022
VIA ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION
The Honorable Michael S. Regan
Administrator
Environmental Protection Agency
Washington, D.C. 20460
Re: National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Primary Copper
Smelting Residual Risk and Technology Review and Primary Copper Smelting Area
Source Technology Review (Docket ID EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430)
Dear Administrator Regan:
On January 11, 2022, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) published the
preamble to a proposed rule addressing the Residual Risk and Technology Review (RTR)
for the National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP)for the major
source Primary Copper Smelters (87 Fed. Reg. 1616; Docket ID EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-
0430). As described in this letter, Freeport-McMoRan Miami Inc. (FMMI) makes two
specific requests in connection with this proposedrule:
e
FMMIrequests that EPA extend the commentperiod for this proposed rule by 45 days.
e
The preamble published in the Federal Register does not contain the proposed rule
language, and the draft rule language contained in the docket does not match the
substantive changes described in the preamble--creating significant uncertainty as to
EPA’s proposed action. Accordingly, FMMIrequests that EPA provide the proposed
rule language as the agency proposesit will appear in the Code of Federal Regulations.
The proposed Primary Copper Smelter RTR rule is of immense importance to
FMMI. The proposedrule, if implemented as proposed, will have enormous impact on the
continued operation ofFMMI’s Miamismelter potentially impacting the smelter’s viability
to operate. The proposed rule is very complex and raises numeroustechnical feasibility
issues. FMMI’sreview will require analysis by experts in several disciplines including:(1)
engineers and smelter experts to evaluate the feasibility, design and cost of the new and
novel air emission control systems; (2) environmental andstatistical experts to evaluate
EPA’s representative emission rates based on an “upper prediction limit” and stack test
data; (3) air modelers and risk assessors to evaluate conclusions based on the EPA’s
residual risk analysis; (4) smelter experts to evaluate EPA’s proposed work practice
standards; and (5) stack testing and smelter experts to evaluate EPA’s proposed compliance
demonstration requirements. All of this work takes time, and it cannot reasonably be done

during the existing commentperiod. In particular, engineers cannot assess the feasibility
and cost of the novel control technologies proposed by EPA (e.g., the injection of carbon
into the acid plant vent) in the limited time offered by the current commentperiod. As such,
an extension of the public commentperiod is warranted to provide for full and meaningful
public participation.
In addition, the proposed Primary Copper Smelter RTRrule, as published, does not
give FMMIadequate notice and the opportunity to comment on the proposed changes to
the Code of Federal Regulations. The January 11, 2022 publication in the Federal Register
does not contain the proposed changesto the text of the relevant regulations. The docket
contains a draft redline of those proposed changes dated November 4, 2021 (“Proposed
Regulation Edits for 40 CFR Part 63, Subpart QQQ: Primary Copper Smelting NESHAP
Risk and Technology Review Proposal” EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0064),
but
this
proposed rule language contains numerous substantive differences from the proposal
outlined in the preamble text. For example, the mercury emission requirements set out in
proposed 40 C.F.R. § 63.1444(j) in the November 4th draft included in the docket are
completely different from the discussion in the published preamble at 87 Fed. Reg. 1636.
Similarly, the compliance periods discussed in proposed 40 C.F.R. § 63.1443(a)(2) in the
November4th draft are not the same as the compliance periods discussed in the preamble
at 87 Fed. Reg. 1650. These inconsistencies create substantial uncertainty with regard to
the actions that EPA is proposing and impair FMMI’s ability to review EPA’s proposed
action and provide meaningful comments. As a result, FMMIrespectfully requests that
EPA provide the proposed language associated with this rulemaking as the agency
proposes will appear in the Code of Federal Regulations, and to provide a suitable
extension of the commentperiod to allow for review of the proposed rule language.
Consistent with
5 U.S.C.
§
553(c),
the regulated community must have a
meaningful opportunity to comment on proposed regulations. In general, a meaningful
opportunity includes a commentperiod ofnot less than 60 days. Exec. Order No. 12,866 §
6(a).
In this case, EPA has not provided the proposed rule language that matches the
preamble and has only provided 45 days for comments. FMMIrespectfully requests that
the agency provide the proposed rule language and extend the current commentperiod for
another 45 days.
Weappreciate your consideration of these requests.
If you have any questions,
please contact Todd Weaverat 602-509-0884 or Bryce Maresat 928-473-7060.
T Sybmitted,
Sey
Miguel Palacios
Vice President and General Manager
Freeport-McMoRan MiamiInc.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0137 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
Kennecott Utah Copper, LLC. 4700 Daybreak Parkway, South Jordan, Utah 84009. 
. 
Rio Tinto Kennecott 
4700 Daybreak Parkway 
South Jordan, Utah 84009 
 
April 26, 2022 
Michael S. Regan 
Administrator, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
Attention: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
 
Submitted through Regulations.gov: 
 
 
Re:  
Kennecott Utah Copper LLC’s Comments on the NESHAP for 
Primary Copper Smelting Residual Risk and Primary Copper 
Smelting Area Source Technology Review 
 
Administrator Regan, 
 
Kennecott Utah Copper LLC (“KUC”) submits the following comments regarding the U.S. 
Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) proposed revisions to the National Emission 
Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Primary Copper Smelting Residual Risk and 
Technology Review and Primary Copper Smelting Area Source Technology Review.1 The 
proposed rule revision proposes changes to 40 CFR part 63, subpart QQQ, Primary Copper 
Smelting Major Sources, and subpart EEEEEE, Primary Copper Smelting Area Sources.  
As EPA acknowledged in the preamble to the proposed rule, KUC owns and operates the 
only area source primary copper smelter located in the United States and, consequently, is 
the only source subject to subpart EEEEEE.2 As such, KUC has unique expertise regarding 
the source category and the feasibility of controls required under the National Emission 
Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (“NESHAP”). The comments presented in this letter 
are specific to EPA’s solicitation for comment, clarification to the preamble, as well as 
proposed minor changes to subpart EEEEEE. 
 
                                                   
1 See Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430; 87 Fed. Reg. 1616, 1616/1 (Jan. 11, 2022); see also 87 
Fed. Reg. 1616, January 11, 2022.  
2 87 Fed. Reg. 1620/3.  

 
 
Page 2 of 5 
 
Comment No. 1 – Correction to EPA’s Statement that Implies All Area Sources Must 
Conduct Stack Tests Every 2.5 years 
In the preamble to the proposed rule revisions, EPA states, 
The NESHAP for area sources (40 CFR part 63, subpart EEEEEE) 
established GACT [Generally Available Control Technology] standards for 
primary copper smelting areas sources and was proposed on October 6, 
2006 (71 FR 59302), and finalized on January 23, 2007 (72 FR 2930). The 
affected sources (i.e., copper concentrate dryers, smelting vessels, 
converting vessels, matter drying and grinding plants, secondary gas systems 
and anode refining departments) are subject to PM [particulate matter] limits 
as surrogate for HAP metals. Compliance must be demonstrated by 
performance tests every 2.5 years.3 
The statement is incorrect to the extent that EPA implies that all sources subject to subpart 
EEEEEE are required to stack test every 2.5 years.  
Subpart EEEEEE segregates existing sources into two categories: (1) sources using batch 
copper converters; and (2) sources not using batch copper converters.4  Under section 
63.11147, sources not using batch copper converters are required to install and operate a 
continuous particulate matter monitor and are not required to conduct stack testing.5 In 
contrast, existing sources using batch copper converters are required to conduct 
performance tests under section 63.11148(e)(2) every 2.5 years. 
As a source not using a batch copper converter, KUC is regulated under section 63.11147 
and is not required by the NESHAP to conduct a performance test every 2.5 years. KUC 
requests that EPA clarify the statement that the requirement to conduct a performance test 
every 2.5 years only applies to existing sources using batch copper converters subject to 
section 63.11148.  
Comment No. 2 – KUC Requests Clarification that Lead and Arsenic Emissions 
Calculations are Derived from Measured Emissions 
In the preamble to the proposed rule revisions, EPA states that estimates associated with 
KUC’s lead and arsenic emissions are “uncertain” because EPA does not have emissions 
                                                   
3 87 Fed. Reg. 1621/1 (emphasis added).  
4 Compare 40 CFR 63.11147 (standards and compliance requirements for existing sources not using batch 
copper converters) with 40 CFR 63.11148 (standards and compliance requirements for existing sources 
using batch copper converters). 
5 40 CFR 63.11147(b) (For purposes of determining compliance with the emissions limit in paragraph (a)(1) 
of this section . . . (1) you must calibrate, maintain and operate a system to continuously measure emissions 
of particulate matter (PM) from the smelter’s main stack.”); see also id. § 63.11149(b) (requiring a PM 
CEMS for new sources).  

 
 
Page 3 of 5 
 
test data from KUC for these pollutants.6 Furthermore, EPA specifically solicited comments, 
data, and information regarding KUC’s lead and arsenic emissions. 
While KUC does not conduct emissions stack testing for lead or arsenic, it is not accurate to 
characterize these emissions as uncertain emission estimates. Rather, than being emission 
estimates, KUC measures the overwhelming majority of its HAP metals emissions from the 
smelter main stack. As contemplated by section 63.11147(b), KUC has installed a 
continuous stack particulate sampler on its smelter main stack. While the NESHAP 
contemplates that the sampler will be used to measure compliance with the PM10 limitation 
found in section 63.11147(a), each daily PM10 sample is analyzed for the primary HAP 
constituents including lead and arsenic, and the fractions of each constituent are reported, 
as required, in the HAP section of the air emission inventory. Indeed, under KUC’s Title V 
Permit, KUC is required to measure both PM10 and Lead emissions from the main stack.7  
Approximately 85% of the emissions from KUC’s copper smelter are routed through the 
main stack, meaning that the overwhelming majority of the lead and arsenic emissions that 
are reported as part of KUC’s emission inventory are based on actual measured emissions. 
Given this foundation, KUC requests that EPA clarify its statement that lead and arsenic 
emissions are uncertain and are, in fact, overwhelmingly based on measured emissions.  
Comment No. 3 – KUC Requests the Removal or Adjustment of the Requirement to 
Submit a Monthly Report Summarizing the 24-hour Average Mass PM10 Emission 
Rates 
Section 63.11147(b)(6) requires existing area sources not operating batch converters to 
“submit to the permitting authority by the 20th day of each month a report summarizing the 
24-hour average mass PM10 emissions rates for the previous month.” In the proposed 
revision, EPA proposes to add text to this provision that requires the monthly submission to 
be made through EPA’s Compliance and Emissions Data Reporting Interface (“CEDRI”).  
KUC requests that, rather than adding the text requiring reporting through CEDRI, EPA 
strike the reporting obligation entirely (i.e., strike section 63.11147(b)(6)). 
In the alternative, KUC requests that EPA adjust the report frequency to make the report 
due either quarterly or semi-annually. KUC understands that the monthly reporting 
requirement originated as a permit condition imposed by Utah regulators following the 
modernization of KUC’s copper smelter in the late 1990s. At the time, monthly reporting was 
reasonable as regulators wanted to ensure that KUC was in continuous compliance with the 
PM10 emission limitations imposed as part of the smelter modernization.  
                                                   
6 87 Fed. Reg. 1624/1.  
7 KUC Title V Operating Permit, Permit No. 3500030004, Conditions II.B.24.a (PM10 emission limitations 
and monitoring requirements) & II.B.24.d (Lead emission limitations and monitoring requirements).  

 
 
Page 4 of 5 
 
However, with more than 25 years of operations since the smelter modernization project, 
reporting this data on a monthly basis is no longer needed to ensure continuous 
compliance. KUC has discussed this issue with the Utah Division of Air Quality (“UDAQ”) 
staff. It is KUC’s understanding that UDAQ agrees that the monthly submission of this 
information is no longer necessary.  
To be clear, KUC is only requesting relief from the obligation to report the information to the 
permitting authority be removed. KUC is not requesting that any other provisions of section 
63.11147(b) be removed or altered, meaning that sources will continue to be required to 
operate a continuous stack particulate sampler, calculation of compliance with the emission 
limitation on an average mass PM10 emission rate for each 24-hour period, and retention of 
both the monitoring records and calculated average mass PM10 emission rate for 5 years. 
As such, sources will continue to collect and calculate the emissions data for compliance 
and this information will be available for review during any inspection or whenever 
requested by the permitting authority. Furthermore, all sources subject to the compliance 
requirements of section 63.11147(b) are also subject to an affirmative duty to report 
deviations to the permitting authority.8 
In the event that EPA declines to remove the reporting obligation, KUC alternatively 
requests that EPA modify the frequency in which the report is to be submitted. As opposed 
to making the report due on the 20th day of each month, KUC requests that report be made 
due either the quarterly or with the source’s semi-annual monitoring reporting.  
Comment No. 4 – With the Removal of SSM Conditions, KUC Requests that EPA 
Remove the Conditions related to Emergency Situations 
KUC supports EPA’s proposal to remove the startup, shutdown, and malfunction (“SSM”) 
provisions from subpart EEEEEE. Additionally, KUC requests that EPA remove the 
corresponding provisions governing emergencies found in section 63.11147(c)(4) and (c)(5) 
and section 63.11148(f)(4) and (f)(5). 
KUC questions the utility of continuing to define an emergency and dictate responses to a 
qualified emergency in the text of the NESHAP given that the regulations already impose an 
obligation to maintain and operate the source consistent with the general duty to minimize 
emissions, including during SSM periods.9 Furthermore, if emergency provisions were 
                                                   
8 See 40 CFR 63.11147(d) (“Deviations. You must submit written notification to the permitting authority of 
any deviation from the requirements of this subpart . . .” and making deviation reports due within 14 days 
of the deviation). As a Title V source, KUC’s smelter is also subject to deviation reporting within 14 days of 
the deviation and also must list all deviations in its semi-annual monitoring report. KUC Title V Operating 
Permit, Permit No. 3500030004, Conditions I.S.2.a & I.S.2.c.    
9 See 40 CFR 63.11147(c) & 63.11147(f). Additionally, for sources not using batch copper converters, the 
retention of the emergency conditions is particularly unnecessary given that the obligations in section 
63.11147(c)(4) are largely duplicated by the subsequent provisions governing deviations found in section 
63.11147(d). 

 
 
Page 5 of 5 
 
critical to the NESHAP, KUC would anticipate that EPA would include such provisions in 
subpart QQQ as well as subpart EEEEEE. 
Closing 
KUC appreciates this opportunity to comment on the National Emission Standards for 
Hazardous Air Pollutants: Primary Copper Smelting Residual Risk and Technology Review 
and Primary Copper Smelting Area Source Technology Review. Should you or EPA staff 
have any questions about this request, please contact Jenny Esker, KUC Principal Advisor, 
Air Quality, at (801) 569-6494, or Jenny.Esker@riotinto.com.  
Regards, 
 
 
 
 
Cassady Kristensen 
Kennecott Utah Copper Environmental Business Partner

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0107 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
From:
Janice Archuleta <JArchuleta@utemountain.org>
 
Sent:
Tuesday, March 1, 2022 11:33 AM
 
To:
A‐AND‐R‐DOCKET
 
Cc:
jarchuleta@utemountain.org
 
Subject:
EPA–HQ–OAR–2020–0430 comments from UTE Mountain Ute Tribe Env 
Programs Dept
 
Attachments:
Comments from UMUTEPD on EPA_HQ_OAR_2020_0430.pdf
Attention:
* Please find the comments from the Environmental Programs Department (attached) 
for EPA‐HQ‐OAR‐2004‐0222‐0430, 
the Proposed Primary Copper Smelter Residual Risk and Technology Review. 
Thank You.
Respectfully,
Janice Archuleta
JANICE ARCHULETA
AIR QUALITY PROGRAM MANAGER
UTE MOUNTAIN UTE TRIBE
520 SUNSET BLVD.
TOWAOC, CO 81334
970.749.5705 MOBILE
970.564.5433 OFFICE

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0095 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
1
Perez, JuanB
From:
gtsiolis@nj.rr.com
Sent:
Thursday, February 10, 2022 8:40 AM
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET; Dawson, Tonisha; French, Chuck
Cc:
'James Stewart'; 'Gary Crane'; 'Eddie Al-Rayes'; 'Matt Russell'
Subject:
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 - REQUEST FOR 30-DAYS EXTENSION OF COMMENT 
PERIOD
Attachments:
2022-2-10p - Asarco's Request for Extension of Comment Period.pdf
Attached please find ASARCO LLC’s request for a 30-days extension of the comment period 
in the above-reference rulemaking. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
602-319-4021 
201-408-4256  
 
for ASARCO LLC

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0135 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
GEORGE A. TSIOLIS 
 
ATTORNEY AT LAW 
 
351 Lydecker Street 
 
Englewood, New Jersey 07631 
 
Office: 201-408-4256 
 
Cell: 602-319-4021 
Fax: 201-408-4622 
 
Email: gtsiolis@nj.rr.com 
Web: www.gtsiolis.com 
 
 
 
 
April 26, 2022 
 
 
Via eRulemaking Portal and Email 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Docket Center 
1301 Constitution Avenue, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20004 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
a-and-r-docket@epa.gov 
 
Re: 
ASARCO LLC’S COMMENTS 
“National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Primary 
Copper Smelting Residual Risk and Technology Review and Primary 
Copper Smelting Area Source Technology Review,” 87 Fed. Reg. 1616 
 
Dear U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”): 
 
ASARCO LLC (“Asarco”), through the undersigned counsel, makes the following 
comments on the above-referenced proposed rulemaking: 
 
A. 
Mercury Test Methods 
 
All aspects of the proposal that entail the option or requirement to use Method 30A, 
Method 30B, or Hg CEMS should not be included in the final revised Subpart QQQ rules. 
 
1. 
There is no discussion, in the proposed rulemaking preamble or supporting 
materials in the rulemaking docket, of any justification for the proposed rules’ imposition of the 
option or requirement to use Method 30A, Method 30B, or Hg CEMS to demonstrate compliance 
with the proposed rules’ numeric Hg emissions limits, or any consideration of the practicability 
of doing so.  The only reference within the entire rulemaking docket to Method 30A and Method 
30B is in the portion of the preamble which states EPA identified no applicable voluntary 
consensus standard for the methods.  87 Fed. Reg. at 1653/3.  This is a failure of EPA’s 
obligation to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation for its action 
including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’”  Motor Vehicle 
Mfrs. Ass’n v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Inc. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983) (quoting Burlington Truck 
Lines, Inc. v. United States, 371 U.S. 156, 168 (1962)).  Therefore, EPA should either: (a) 
exclude from the final rules the option or requirement to use Method 30A, Method 30B, or Hg 
CEMS; or (b) issue a supplemental notice of proposed rulemaking that (i) states EPA’s 
justification for the proposed rules’ imposition of the option or requirement to use Method 30A, 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 2 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
Method 30B, or Hg CEMS to demonstrate compliance with the proposed rules’ numeric Hg 
emissions limits, (ii) examines the practicability of doing so, and (iii) invites the public to 
comment accordingly. 
 
2. 
According to the rulemaking preamble and MACT floor analysis in the 
rulemaking docket: (a) the proposed existing-sources Hg emissions limit of 0.0043 lbs/hr 
“reflects a 90 percent reduction from the acid plant portion of the UPL MACT floor level of 0.01 
lbs/hr”; (b) the MACT floor of 0.01 lbs/hr is derived using a 99% UPL of 14.6 μg/dscm; (c) the 
99% UPL of 14.6 μg/dscm was used because it was greater than 3 times an RDL of 1.044 
μg/dscm; and (d) the RDL of 1.044 μg/dscm was derived solely using Method 29 test data.  87 
Fed. Reg. at 1636/1-2; MACT Floor Analysis, Doc. 55.  This means the proposed 0.0043 lbs/hr 
limit is a function of emissions data gathered solely using Method 29.  As such, it would be 
inappropriate to require or authorize the use of Hg CEMS, or any method other than Method 29, 
to demonstrate compliance with the proposed 0.0043 lbs/hr limit.  See 42 U.S.C. § 7412(d)(3)(B) 
(“Emission standards promulgated under this subsection for existing sources in a category or 
subcategory . . . shall not be less stringent, and may be more stringent than . . . the average 
emission limitation achieved by the best performing 5 sources (for which the Administrator has 
or could reasonably obtain emissions information) in the category or subcategory for categories 
or subcategories with fewer than 30 sources.”);  Sierra Club v. EPA, 353 F.3d 976, 984 (D.C. 
Cir. 2004) (“EPA complied with Section 7412(d)(3) by setting emission limits on the basis of the 
[pollutant] control that the best sources actually achieved.”). 
 
 
B. 
Mercury CEMS Data Averaging Period 
 
EPA should reconsider the 2-hour rolling-average provision in proposed § 63.1453(g). 
 
1. 
There is nothing in the rulemaking docket that justifies a 2-hour rolling-
average basis; or that explains why rolling averages specifically on a 2-hour basis, as opposed to 
a 4-hour, 8-hour, 24-hour, 30-day, 180-day, 365-day, or other basis, are appropriate.  This is a 
failure of EPA’s obligation to “examine the relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation 
for its action including a ‘rational connection between the facts found and the choices made.’” 
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n, 463 U.S. at 43. 
 
2. 
As stated above, the proposed 0.0043 lbs/hr limit “reflects a 90 percent 
reduction from the acid plant portion of the UPL MACT floor level of 0.01 lbs/hr.”  87 Fed. Reg. 
at 1636/2.  This means that the proposed 0.0043 lbs/hr limit is a function ultimately of 99% UPL 
statistical analysis of Method 29 test data—for which reason it would be appropriate to require 
the use of Method 29 test data to demonstrate compliance with 0.0043 lbs/hr limit.  See id.  
Conversely, it would be inappropriate for EPA to include within Subpart QQQ a requirement or 
authorization to use 2-hour rolling averages of Hg CEMS data to demonstrate compliance with a 
numeric Hg emissions limit, unless the numeric limit is a function of 99% UPL statistical 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 3 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
analysis of 2-hour rolling averages of relevant Hg CEMS data.  See 42 U.S.C. § 7412(d)(3)(B); 
Sierra Club v. EPA, 353 F.3d at 984. 
 
3. 
The consent decree that was entered in 2015 and currently governs 
Asarco’s operation of the Hayden smelter employs an aggressive 8-hour rolling average limit for 
the PM CEMS data employed to demonstrate compliance with Subpart QQQ’s current process-
stack numeric PM emissions limits.  Doc. 18, ¶¶ 16.a, 17.a, 18.a, 19.a, 20.a.  Moreover, the 
consent decree recognizes the potential that “inherent process variability precludes compliance 
with a PM emission limit set forth in Paragraphs 16-20 on an 8-hour rolling average basis at one 
or more of the exhaust streams,” for which reasons the decree gives Asarco the option to request, 
and EPA to grant, “a longer averaging period, not to exceed 24 hours.”  Doc. 18, ¶ 21.  There is 
nothing in the rulemaking preamble or supporting materials in the rulemaking docket that 
indicates why the 2-hour rolling-average period for Hg CEMS data in proposed § 63.1453(g) 
would be appropriate when no lesser than an 8-hour rolling average period was deemed 
appropriate for PM CEMS data, for the same exhaust streams.  Therefore, if, comments A.1 and 
A.2 (above) notwithstanding, EPA determines to include in a final rulemaking the option or 
requirement to use Hg CEMS to demonstrate compliance with the proposed rules’ numeric Hg 
emissions limits, then the averaging period in proposed § 63.1453(g (1)(iv) should be raised to 
24 hours or greater;1 and included in the final rulemaking should be a fulsome explanation of the 
scientific justification of the averaging period, in keeping with the obligation stated in 42 U.S.C. 
§ 7412(d)(3)(B). 
 
C. 
Mercury Site-Specific Operating Limit 
 
The proposed rules’ provisions on site-specific operating limits and operating-parameter 
alternatives for demonstrating initial and continuous compliance with the proposed numeric Hg 
emissions limit are materially unclear and need substantial clarification as to EPA’s intent. 
 
 
1. 
Proposed § 63.1451(j) states initial compliance has been demonstrated if, 
inter alia, a “site-specific operating limit for a parameter” has been established “based on values 
measured during the performance test you conducted to demonstrate initial compliance.”  
Similarly, proposed § 63.1453(g)(2) provides the option of demonstrating continuous compliance 
by monitoring “the operating parameter established during the [initial] performance tests.”  
However, the only provisions of the rule that would seem to correspond to proposed §§ 
63.1451(j) and 63.1453(g)(2) concern the development of operating limits and appropriate 
parameters for control devices other than a baghouse or venturi wet scrubber—for example, 
proposed §§ 63.1450(d)(3) and 63.1452(d).  Whereas, for situations in which the control device 
 
 
1 The imposition of the 8- to 24-hour averaging periods in the consent decree reflected EPA’s muscular 
exercise of the court’s equity jurisdiction. 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 4 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
is a baghouse or venturi wet scrubber, the proposed rules are unclear how initial compliance 
would be demonstrated, unless the intent of proposed § 63.1451(j) is that the conditions in either 
paragraph (j)(1) or paragraph (j)(2) must be met; and unclear how continuous compliance would 
be demonstrated, unless the intent of proposed § 63.1453(g) is that the requirements in 
paragraphs (g)(1), or (2), or (3) must be met. 
 
2. 
Overall, it is unclear what EPA’s basic intent is, on how the operating-
parameter alternatives for demonstrating initial and continuous compliance with the Hg 
emissions limit in proposed § 63.1444 would work.  EPA should issue a supplemental notice of 
proposed rulemaking that explains the operating-parameter alternatives methodology—
including, without limitation, what kinds of representative parameters are envisioned—and invite 
the public to comment accordingly; otherwise, EPA should restrict the method of demonstrating 
initial and continuous compliance to performance testing using Method 29. 
 
3. 
The parameters of pressure drop and flow rate, notably, correlate to 
particulate matter; whereas, much of the Hg emitted at the smelters is in vapor form, for which 
reason PM does not serve as a surrogate.  87 Fed. Reg. at 1636/1.  In addition, unlike PM 
emissions, Hg emissions are highly dependent on the composition of the concentrate feed to the 
smelter.  Therefore, it would seem impossible to establish a PM-based parametric alternative for 
demonstrating initial and continuous compliance with the Hg emissions limit in proposed § 
63.1444. 
  
D. 
Reduced-Frequency Monitoring of Mercury Emissions 
 
Hg emissions at the Hayden smelter are already extremely low, as reflected in the 
derivation of the proposed MACT floor limit, for new sources, of 0.00097 lbs/hr.  87 Fed. Reg. 
at 1636/1.  Given such low rates, EPA should include in the final rulemaking a provision that, if 
demonstrations of continuous compliance show Hg emissions rates are below a certain 
percentage of the applicable numeric limit for a specific period time, then the frequency of the 
demonstration of continuous compliance can be reduced.  There is ample precedent for this 
approach, among the NESHAPs that concern Hg emissions.  See, e.g., 40 C.F.R. § 63.7515(b) 
(industrial boilers and process heaters); 40 C.F.R. § 63.10005(h) (low-emitting electric utility 
steam generating units). 
 
E. 
Combined Fugitive PM Emissions Limit at the Roofline 
 
Proposed 40 C.F.R. § 63.1444 would require fugitive PM emissions not to exceed 4.3 
lbs/hr “from the smelter building roofline vents,” 1.7 lbs/hr “from the converter department 
roofline vents,” and 1.6 lbs/hr “from the anode refining department roofline vents.”  This reflects 
an intention to limit fugitive PM mass emissions rates regardless of fugitive PM concentration.  
Nonetheless, such an approach to regulating roofline fugitive PM emissions makes no sense for 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 5 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
the Hayden smelter, since: (1) the majority of fugitive emissions at the roofline arise from 
secondary and transfer activities between the smelting, converting and anode-refining processes;2 
(2) the configuration of these three departments ensures that such fugitive PM emissions 
comingle substantially before exiting the roofline vents; (3) the extents of this comingling vary 
materially as a function of wind and heat conditions; and (4) determining empirically (using the 
methods specified in proposed § 63.1450(e)-(f)) whether any of the proposed three individual 
emissions rates has been exceeded would, as a result, be impossible.  FMI’s Miami smelter 
would experience similar conditions. 
 
In addition, the fugitive PM emission data that EPA used to develop the proposed 4.3 
lbs/hr and 1.7 lbs/hr limits were generated at the Miami smelter.  MACT Floor Analysis, Doc. 
55.  These proposed individual limits would not be correspondingly applicable to fugitive PM 
emissions from Hayden’s smelting furnace and converters because the smelting-furnace 
technology employed at Hayden yields a lower matte grade than the Miami smelting furnace, 
which means that significantly more of the smelting and converting process occurs in Hayden’s 
converter department than in Miami’s converter department. 
 
The final rulemaking should normalize these conditions by replacing the proposed three 
individual emissions rates with one combined mass emissions rate—which, unlike the proposed 
three individual emissions rates, could be practicably enforceable: 
 
You must not discharge to the atmosphere process fugitive gases 
from the smelter-building, converter-department, and anode 
refining-department roofline vents containing filterable particular 
matter emissions in excess of 7.6 lbs/hr as measured using the test 
methods specified in § 63.1450(e). 
 
The final rulemaking should, correspondingly, specify test methods that apply to all 
process fugitive PM emissions at the roofline, irrespective of their source.  At first blush, this 
would entail combining paragraphs (e) and (f) of proposed § 63.1450 into a single paragraph (e).  
However, see Comment F (below). 
 
 
 
 
2 The process gases are already well-captured and controlled as a result of the capture-and-control 
technologies and operational requirements imposed and implemented under the consent decree.  Doc. 18, 
¶¶ 8, 9, 13, 24, 26 and 27.  The result is that roofline PM emissions arise primarily from: (i) matte ladles, 
tapped from the smelting furnace, that are picked up from the matte tunnel exits and carried via crane to 
the converters; (ii) ladles of slag from the converters that are returned and poured into the smelting 
furnace; (iii) routine cleaning of the ladles; (iv) blister copper that is transferred via cranes to the anode 
furnaces; and (v) anode slag that is returned to the converters via crane. 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 6 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
F. 
Test Methods Proposed for Roofline Fugitive PM Emissions 
 
The test methods specified in paragraphs (e) and (f) of proposed § 63.1450 are not 
practicable for demonstrating compliance with any fugitive PM emissions-rate limit at the 
roofline. 
 
1. 
Method 1 cannot be applied for the purposes stated in subparagraphs 
(e)(1) and (f)(1) of proposed § 63.1450. 
 
a. 
As § 1.2 of Method 1 provides, “the method is applicable to gas 
streams flowing in ducts, stacks and flues.”  This is reflected in subparagraphs (e)(1)(ii)-(iii) and 
(f)(1)(ii)-(iii) of proposed § 63.1450, which require determinations of volumetric flow rate and 
dry molecular weight of the “stack gas.”  There is nothing in the rulemakings governing Method 
1 that indicates an intent that it be applicable to roofline fugitive emissions or that it can 
practicably be applied to roofline fugitive emissions.  Therefore, the proposed rulemaking’s 
assumption that Method 1 is applicable and can be practicably applied for the purposes stated in 
subparagraphs (e)(1) and (f)(1) of proposed § 63.1450 is without foundation. 
 
b. 
Method 1 provides two alternative procedures: a “simplified 
procedure,” and an “alternative procedure.”   The “simplified procedure,” according to § 1.2, 
“cannot be used when the measurement site is less than two stack or duct diameters or less than a 
half diameter upstream from a flow disturbance.”  Neither stack diameters nor duct diameters 
can be defined for the smelter facilities’ roofline vents, within the meaning and purposes of § 
1.2.  For this reason, as well, the “simplified procedure” cannot be practicably applied for the 
purposes stated in subparagraphs (e)(1) and (f)(1) of proposed § 63.1450. 
 
c. 
The “alternative procedure” is described in § 11.5 of Method 1.  It 
depends on the ability to develop representative pitch and yaw angles of the gas flow to be 
sampled, based on directional flow-sensing probe measurements of pitch and yaw angles at forty 
or more traverse points within the flow.  It is impossible to perform this procedure at the smelter 
facilities’ roofline vents because fugitive emissions at the vents occur at a variety of angles that 
are constantly changing due to ambient winds.  For this reason, as well, the “alternative 
procedure” cannot be practicably applied for the purposes stated in subparagraphs (e)(1) and 
(f)(1) of proposed § 63.1450. 
 
2. 
Method 5D cannot be applied for the purposes stated in subparagraphs 
(e)(1) and (f)(1) of proposed § 63.1450. 
 
a. 
As § 1.2.1 of Method 5D states, “this method is applicable for the 
determination of PM emissions from positive pressure fabric filters.”  There is nothing in the 
rulemakings governing Method 5D that indicates an intent that it be applicable to roofline 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 7 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
fugitive emissions or that it can practicably be applied to roofline fugitive emissions.  Therefore, 
the proposed rulemaking’s assumption that Method 5D is applicable and can be practicably 
applied for the purposes stated in subparagraphs (e)(1) and (f)(1) of proposed § 63.1450 is 
without foundation. 
 
b. 
Central to Method 5D is the requirement that the sample gas be 
withdrawn iso-kinetically from the source; i.e., the velocity of the gas withdrawn into the sample 
probe must more or less match the velocity of the gas stream at that sample-withdrawal point.  
This velocity-matching ensures that the concentrations of solids and droplets in the sample are 
representative of the concentrations of solids and droplets in the gas stream being sampled.  
However, due to the varying ambient winds and temperature conditions affecting fugitive 
emissions within the building, flows at the roofline vents are highly variable, and would be so for 
the duration of a sampling event, making the iso-kinetic sampling required by Method 5D 
practically impossible. 
 
3. 
Oregon Method 8 cannot be applied for the purposes stated in 
subparagraphs (e)(1) and (f)(1) of proposed § 63.1450. 
 
a. 
According to § 1.2. of Oregon DEQ’s Source Sampling Manuel 
(rev. November 2018), Oregon Method 8 is applicable to point (i.e., “stack”) sources, not 
fugitive emissions.  There is nothing in the public record that indicates an intent that Oregon 
Method 8 be applicable to roofline fugitive emissions or that it can practicably be applied to 
roofline fugitive emissions.  Therefore, the proposed rulemaking’s assumption that Oregon 
Method 8 is applicable and can be practicably applied for the purposes stated in subparagraphs 
(e)(1) and (f)(1) of proposed § 63.1450 is without foundation. 
 
b. 
Central to Oregon Method 8 is the requirement that the sample gas 
be withdrawn iso-kinetically from the source; i.e., the velocity of the gas withdrawn into the 
sample probe must more or less match the velocity of the gas stream at that sample-withdrawal 
point.  This velocity-matching ensures that the concentrations of solids and droplets in the 
sample are representative of the concentrations of solids and droplets in the gas stream being 
sampled.  However, due to the varying ambient winds and temperature conditions affecting 
fugitive emissions within the building, flows at the roofline vents are highly variable, and would 
be so for the duration of a sampling event, making the iso-kinetic sampling required by Oregon 
Method 8 practically impossible. 
 
 
 
4. 
In general, iso-kinetic test methods such as Method 5 and Oregon Method 
8 are applicable to forced-draft emissions sources with more or less constant exhaust-flow rates.  
In contrast, roofline fugitive emissions are not subject to a forced draft and occur at highly 
variable rates.  Indeed, during high wind events, the air pressure above the roofline can exceed 
the force of the upward draft of fugitive emissions, at some of the vents.  

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 8 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
 
5. 
For the above reasons, if Subpart QQQ is going to be revised to include 
compliance monitoring of fugitive PM emissions at the roofline, then another test method needs 
to be considered.  See Comment G (below). 
 
G. 
Portable Air Samplers of Roofline Fugitive PM Emissions 
 
The consent decree that was entered in 2015 and currently governs Asarco’s operation of 
the Hayden smelter requires the performance of process fugitive emissions studies, pursuant to a 
protocol that is approved by EPA.  Doc. 18, ¶ 22.  One of the purposes of this requirement is to 
quantify process fugitive PM emissions “from 1) all processing steps from the copper 
concentrate dryers through the anode casting department, inclusive of those end points, and 2) 
the entire building(s) housing the smelting flash furnace, copper converter department, and anode 
furnaces.”  Pursuant to this requirement, Asarco on January 20, 2017 submitted to EPA a 
protocol for the conduct of the fugitive emissions studies (“FES Protocol” or “Protocol”).  EPA 
approved the Protocol on May 24. 2017.  Copies of the Protocol and EPA’s approval of the 
Protocol are provided as Attachment 1 to these comments. 
 
1. 
Within the FES Protocol is a determination that process fugitive PM 
emissions at the roofline shall be quantified via a sampling methodology that centers on: (a) the 
use of MiniVol portable air samplers at the roofline vents; and (b) collocating, with the samplers, 
temperature sensors and axial-flow sensors or pilot tubes to determine the volumes and rates of 
flow at the vents.  EPA’s approval of the Protocol constitutes a determination by EPA that this 
sampling method is appropriate for determining the rate of fugitive PM emissions at the roofline.  
The MiniVol sampler, in particular, is a low-flow sampler, which is well-suited to low, variable 
air flows at the roofline—unlike the iso-kinetic sampling methods specified in subparagraphs 
(e)(1) and (f)(1) of proposed § 63.1450. 
 
2. 
The MiniVol sampler, though jointly developed by EPA with the 
manufacturer, Airmetrics (http://www.airmetrics.com/company.html), is not part of an EPA-
certified reference method or equivalent method.  However, as stated in the FES Protocol, 
sampling results obtained using MiniVol samplers have been documented to closely approximate 
results obtained using EPA-certified reference-method samplers. 
 
3. 
Other relevant attributes of MiniVol samplers are that: (a) they can be run 
concurrently at several locations along the roofline, which better captures fluctuations in flows 
and emissions along the roofline; (b) they can be run for long times, allowing for the collection 
of samples representative of the variable process operations and heat and climactic conditions 
occurring within the building; (c) the samplers’ base-pump system can be kept outside of the 
roofline vents, using a sample line located between the sampler and the filter assembly, so that 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 9 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
the elevated temperature environment at the roofline does not pose a continuous safety problem; 
and (d) the samplers’ size makes them suitable for the confined spaces of the roofline vents. 
 
4. 
Based on the foregoing, including EPA’s approval of the FES protocol, 
the final rulemaking should include a provision that explicitly authorizes the use of MiniVol 
portable air samplers, together with appropriate temperature and flow sensors, to determine the 
rate of fugitive PM emissions at the roofline and whether those rates exceed the combined 
fugitive PM emissions-rate limit described in Comment E (above), “pursuant to a fugitive 
emissions monitoring protocol specific to the relevant smelter that is submitted to, and approved 
by, EPA OAR, OAQPS, Measurement Technology Group” or such other reviewing body that 
EPA may deem appropriate (such as the Arizona DEQ).  Asarco believes: (a) six months after 
the date of the final rulemaking’s publication in the Federal Register would be an appropriate 
deadline for submittal of the protocol for agency approval; and (b) two years after agency 
approval of the protocol would be an appropriate deadline for commencing measurements of the 
rate of fugitive PM emissions at the roofline to determine whether they exceed the fugitive PM 
emissions-rate limit.3 
 
H. 
Potential Lead Limit 
 
Asarco agrees with EPA’s determination not to propose a BTF lead emissions limit in 
addition to, or instead of, the fugitive PM emissions limit in proposed § 63.1444(i)(3).  87 Fed. 
Reg. at 1635/2-3.  Asarco adopts, as part of these comments, the reasoning underlying EPA’s 
determination.  Id.; MACT Floor Analysis, Doc. 55, § 4.7.  In addition, Asarco’s reasons in favor 
of a combined fugitive PM emissions-rate limit at the roofline, in Comment E (above), militate 
against a BTF lead emissions limit on process fugitive emissions arising specifically from the 
anode refining process. 
 
I. 
Applicability of Emissions Standards at All Times 
 
Proposed § 63.1448(a) provides that, on or after 180 days after publication of the final 
rulemaking in the Federal Register, “you must be in compliance with the emission limitations, 
work practice standards, and operation and maintenance requirements in this subpart at all 
times.” 
 
1. 
Proposed § 63.1448(a), if included in the final rulemaking, would violate 
42 U.S.C. § 7412(d)(3)(B), which requires the emissions standards promulgated under that 
 
 
3 Cf. Proposed § 63.1443(a)(1) (“For existing . . .smelting building roof vents, converter department roof 
vents, and anode refining department roof vents, you must comply with each emission limitation . . . in 
this subpart that applies to you no later than [INSERT DATE 2 YEARS AFTER DATE OF 
PUBLICATION OF THE FINAL RULE IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER].”). 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 10 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
subsection for existing sources in a category or subcategory to be based empirically or 
predictively on “the average emission limitation achieved by the best performing 5 sources (for 
which the Administrator has or could reasonably obtain emissions information) in the category 
or subcategory for categories or subcategories with fewer than 30 sources.”  This is because there 
is no indication in the public record that the numeric emissions limits in the current Subpart 
QQQ rules and proposed rules are based, at least in part, on emissions data from primary copper 
smelters that were gathered during periods of startup and shutdown.  See also Sierra Club v. 
EPA, 353 at 984 (“EPA complied with Section 7412(d)(3) by setting emission limits on the basis 
of the [pollutant] control that the best sources actually achieved.”). 
 
2. 
Until such time as EPA develops and promulgates MACT or BTF numeric 
emissions limits based on emissions data from the relevant primary copper smelting sources that 
include emissions data generated during periods of startup and shutdown, the MACT and BTF 
numeric emissions limits in the current Subpart QQQ rules and proposed rules cannot, as a 
matter of law, be applied to emissions that occur during periods of startup and shutdown.  This is 
not avoided by the several provisions in the proposal that would entail the conduct of 
performance tests and relative-accuracy testing of CEMS under “normal operating condition.” 
 
3. 
Nor does the decision in Sierra Club v. EPA, 551 F. 3d 1019 (D.C. Cir. 
2008), provide EPA carte blanche to sidestep the fundamental requirement of 42 U.S.C. § 
7412(d)(3)(B).  The 2-1 majority in Sierra Club took issue with what it perceived to be an 
abdication by EPA of its statutory obligation to promulgate NESHAPs that apply on a 
continuous basis, but it explicitly recognized that different numeric emissions limits and 
standards can apply to situations of startup and shutdown.  See 551 F.3d at 1027 (stating the 
definition of “emission limitation” and “emission standard” in 42 U.S.C. § 7602(k) “suggests 
that emissions reduction requirements ‘assure continuous emission reduction’ without 
necessarily continuously applying a single standard”).4 
 
4. 
If EPA is going to meet the requirement of 42 U.S.C. § 7412(d)(3)(B), in 
keeping with the majority’s decision in Sierra Club, then the only kinds of MACT or BTF 
numeric emissions limits it may apply to periods of startup and shutdown would be numeric 
limits promulgated based wholly or appropriately in part on relevant emissions data gathered 
during periods of startup and shutdown.   Proposed § 63.1448(a), as written, evades this basic 
requirement.  
 
 
 
4 The central holding of Sierra Club was that, “[b]ecause the general duty [to minimize emissions, at 40 
C.F.R. § 63.6(e)(1)(i)] is the only standard [in the rulemaking at bar] that applies during SSM events—
and accordingly no section 112 standard governs these events—the SSM exemption violates the CAA’s 
requirement that some section 112 standard apply continuously.” 551 F.3d at 1028 (emphasis added). 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 11 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
5. 
Until EPA is able to promulgate, based on startup- and shutdown-
emissions data, Subpart QQQ numeric emissions limits that apply to periods of startup and 
shutdown, EPA should follow the logic of previous NESHAPs rulemakings, upheld in the courts, 
that imposed work practice standards applicable to periods of startup and shutdown instead of 
numeric emissions limits.  See Comment J.4 (below).  
 
J. 
Work Practice Standards Instead of Numeric Emissions Limits 
 
Under 42 U.S.C. § 7412(h)(1)-(2)(B), if EPA determines that it is not feasible to 
prescribe a numeric emissions limit because “the application of a measurement methodology to 
[the] particular class or source is not practicable due to technological or economic limitations,” 
then EPA may promulgate a “design, equipment, work practice, or operational standard, or 
combination thereof,” instead of a numeric emissions limit.  See, e.g., Sierra Club v. EPA, 884 
F.3d 1185, 1190 (D.C. Cir. 2018) (stating work practice standards can be thought of as a 
“statutory Plan B,” which EPA can resort to “when using numeric limits is ‘not feasible’”). 
 
1. 
In the mercury and air toxics standards rulemaking (“MATS 
Rulemaking”), for example, EPA proposed numeric emissions limits applicable to periods of 
startup and shutdown; received public comments on the lack, in the record, of adequate startup- 
and shutdown-emissions data and “concerns regarding the reliability of measurements obtained 
from EGUs during such periods”; and, in response, issued a final rule that eliminated the 
numeric emissions limits for periods of startup and shutdown and, in their stead, promulgated 
work practice standards applicable to the periods of startup and shutdown.  77 Fed. Reg. 9304, 
9380-81 (February 16, 2012).  On judicial review, the court remanded the rulemaking, not 
because it found fault with EPA’s determination to impose work practices standards instead of 
numeric emissions limits for periods of startup and shutdown, but rather on the grounds that the 
public had not had sufficient opportunity to comment on EPA’s determination “that the ‘best 
performing’ power plants cannot reliably measure emissions until four hours after they generate 
electricity.”  Chesapeake Climate Action Network v. EPA, 952 F.3d 310, 318-19 (D.C. Cir. 
2020).  In other words, the question on the merits, warranting remand, concerned the duration of 
startup after which numeric emissions limits should apply.  Neither the court’s opinion nor 
subsequent EPA rulemaking or litigation concerning the MATS Rulemaking (including the 
litigation of EPA’s May 2020 rollback of the MATS Rulemaking) has found fault with EPA’s 
basic determination that, in the absence of a reliable means of measuring emissions during 
startup and shutdown, work practice standards instead of numeric emission limits for periods of 
startup and shutdown are appropriate for those NESHAPs. 
 
2. 
There are other examples, in the NESHAPs, of EPA’s application of work 
practice standards instead of numeric emissions limits, when there are no reliable means of 
measuring emissions during startup and shutdown.  See, e.g., 76 Fed. Reg. 15608, 15613 (March 
21, 2011) (“Industrial Boilers Rulemaking”) (determining to apply work practice standards 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 12 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
instead of numeric emissions limits to startup and shutdown emissions because it was “not 
technically feasible” for boiler operators to conduct the emissions testing necessary to enforce 
numeric limits during startup and shutdown); Sierra Club v. EPA, 884 F.3d at 1199-1204 
(upholding that determination). 
 
3. 
As explained in Comment F (above), Method 1, Method 5D, and Oregon 
Method 8 are not appropriate for the purpose of measuring the rate of fugitive PM emissions at 
the roofline to determine whether they exceed a fugitive PM emissions-rate limit.  Also, as 
explained in Comment G.2 (above), the MiniVol sampler is not part of an EPA-certified 
reference method or equivalent method.   Given these considerations, the final rulemaking 
should provide that the roofline fugitive PM emissions-rate limit that is imposed in the final 
rulemaking shall not apply in advance of EPA’s approval of the fugitive emissions-monitoring 
protocol described in Comment G.4 above and a reasonable period of time needed to implement 
the approved protocol.  Here, Asarco reiterates its suggestion in Comment G.4, that: (a) six 
months after the date of the final rulemaking’s publication in the Federal Register would be an 
appropriate deadline for submittal of the protocol for agency approval; and (b) two years after 
agency approval of the protocol would be an appropriate deadline for commencing 
measurements of the rate of fugitive PM emissions at the roofline to determine whether they 
exceed the fugitive PM emissions-rate limit.  Correspondingly, the final rulemaking should 
provide that, during the pendency of the protocol’s implementation, only the work practice 
standards and operation and maintenance requirements of the revised Subpart QQQ rules shall 
apply to the process fugitive PM emissions.  This would be consistent with 42 U.S.C. § 
7412(h)(1)-(2)(B) and the approach EPA took in the MATS and Industrial Boilers rulemakings. 
 
4. 
In relation to Comment I (above), both the MATS Rulemaking and the 
Industrial Boilers Rulemaking based their determinations to apply work practice standards, 
instead of numeric emissions limits, to periods of startup and shutdown, not only on the lack of 
reliable means of measuring emissions during startup and shutdown, but also on the scarcity or 
unavailability of emissions data generated during periods of startup and shutdown which made it 
impracticable to develop defensible numeric emissions limits that apply to periods of startup and 
shutdown.  77 Fed. Reg. at 9381 (“Thus, we do not have sufficient data on emissions that occur 
during startup and shutdown on which to set emission standards.  We are therefore establishing 
work practice standards rather than numeric emissions standards for periods of startup and 
shutdown in the final rule.”; 952 F.3d at 318-19 (remanding on other grounds); 76 Fed. Reg. at 
15641-42 (“Numerous commenters raised concerns that insufficient data are currently available 
to establish emission standards for SSM events . . . EPA has considered these comments and has 
revised this final rule to incorporate a work practice standard for periods of startup and 
shutdown”); 884 F.3d at 1199-1204 (upholding that decision).  Likewise, the final Subpart QQQ 
rulemaking should provide that, based on the scarcity or unavailability in the rulemaking dockets 
of startup- and shutdown-emissions data from the relevant primary copper smelting sources, and 
until such data are gathered and appropriately used to promulgate Subpart QQQ numeric 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 13 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
emissions limits that apply to periods of startup and shutdown, only the work practice standards 
and operation and maintenance requirements of the revised Subpart QQQ rules shall apply to 
periods of startup and shutdown. 
 
5. 
Without limiting the scope of Comment J.4 (above), Asarco notes that: (a) 
during EPA’s development of the proposed rulemaking, EPA asked Asarco whether it was aware 
of any issues that the Hayden smelter might have with a requirement to be in compliance with 
Subpart QQQ standards “at all times”; and (b) Asarco responded that, if Subpart QQQ were to be 
revised accordingly, then, at a minimum, the numeric emissions limit applicable to the acid plant, 
at § 63.1444(b)(1) and (d)(5), would need to be revised, somehow, to account for acid plant 
emissions that occur during periods of acid plant startup and shutdown.  See Attachment 2.5  
Asarco’s response also indicated that it may be impossible to generate reliable measurements of 
nonsulfuric acid PM emissions from the acid plant during periods of acid plant startup and 
shutdown.  Id.  Asarco’s two attempts to achieve PS-11 correlation of a PM CEMS at the acid 
plant tail gas, pursuant to the terms of the Hayden smelter consent decree, Doc. 18, ¶¶ 14-15, 
were unsuccessful.  See Attachment 3.6  In the absence of a reliable means of measuring 
nonsulfuric acid PM emissions during acid-plant startup and shutdown, the final rulemaking 
should state that the 6.2 mg/dscm limit of § 63.1444(b)(1) and (d)(5) shall not apply to a primary 
copper smelter’s acid plant outside of the plant’s normal operating conditions; and that only the 
work practice standards and operation and maintenance requirements of the revised Subpart 
QQQ rules shall govern startup and shutdown emissions at the acid plant.7  This would be 
consistent with 42 U.S.C. § 7412(h)(1)-(2) and the approach EPA took in the MATS and 
Industrial Boilers rulemakings. 
 
K. 
Residual Risk 
 
Asarco adopts, as part of these comments, the reasoning of EPA’s residual risk 
assessment concerning the proposed rulemaking, and offers the following additional information 
for EPA’s consideration. 
 
In the proposed rulemaking, EPA states as follows: 
 
 
 
5 Asarco incorporates all of its statements in Attachment 2 as part of these comments. 
6 Asarco has committed to EPA to make a third attempt at PS-11 correlation of a PM CEMS at the acid 
plant tail gas, after Asarco resumes operation of the smelter. 
7 For purposes of this Comment J.5, Asarco believes an acid plant’s normal operating conditions (post-
startup and pre-shutdown) are defined by the period of time during which at least one acid plant blower is 
operating and the minimum catalyst-bed temperature required to sustain the plant’s conversion of SO2 to 
SO3 is maintained at all the catalyst beds without contributions of heat from a preheater or other external 
source of heat. 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 14 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
The acute arsenic HQ is based upon an REL, the acute REL 
represents a health-protective level of exposure, with effects not 
anticipated below those levels, even for repeated exposures; 
however, the level of exposure that would cause health effects is 
not specifically known.  As the exposure concentration increases 
above the acute REL, the potential for effects increases.  Based 
upon an acute HQ value of 2 for arsenic emissions based on the 
REL, and given the protective nature of the REL (as described 
previously in this preamble, in section III.C.3.c) and without any 
additional acute health benchmarks to apply to further characterize 
the potential for severe or reversible effects it is reasonable to 
assume that acute health risks from arsenic for this source category 
would be low. 
 
87 Fed. Reg. at 1643/2-3.  Asarco supports this assumption. 
 
The only health benchmark available for acute toxicity of arsenic is in the form of the 
REL, which is based on the most sensitive, relevant adverse health effect reported in the peer-
reviewed medical and toxicological literature.  The REL of 0.2 µg/m3, which is relied upon in the 
proposed rulemaking, is ascribed to arsenic by the California Office of Environmental Health 
and Hazard Assessment (“OEHHA”).  It is based on peer-reviewed studies that tracked the fetal 
weight of mice exposed to increasing concentrations of arsenic and, therefore, represents the 
most sensitive adverse health effect reported by any of the studies reviewed by OEHHA.  The 
absence, conversely, of AEGLs and ERPG levels for arsenic is adequately offset by the 
rulemaking’s reliance on the REL and ultra-conservative exposure assumptions employed by 
EPA in its acute screening assessment.  87 Fed. Reg. at 1631/2-3. 
 
*   *   *   * 
 
Asarco appreciates the opportunity to provide the above comments. 
 
If you have any questions or would like to confer regarding the information provided 
above, then please don’t hesitate to let me know at 602-319-4021 or gtsiolis@nj.rr.com. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
for ASARCO LLC 
 

  
 
 
 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
April 26, 2022 
Page 15 of 15 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
Attachments 
1 – Hayden Smelter Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol and EPA’s Approval of Protocol 
2 – Discussion between EPA and Asarco Regarding Achievability of Subpart QQQ Numeric 
Emissions Limits During Periods of Startup and Shutdown 
3 – Record of Two Unsuccessful Attempts to Certify PM CEMS at Acid Plant Tail Gas 
 
 
Copies (via e-mail) 
Daniel Czecholinski, Director, Air Quality Division, ADEQ – czecholinski.daniel@azdeq.gov 
Zachary Dorn, Environmental Science Specialist, ADEQ – dorn.zachary@azdeq.gov 
Manuel Hallivis, General Counsel, ASARCO LLC – manuel.hallivis@americasmining.com 
Paulina Orozco, Corporate Attorney, ASARCO LLC – paulina.orozco@americasmining.com 
James Stewart, Director, Environmental, ASARCO LLC –  JaStewart@asarco.com 
Kevin McPeak, PE, Manager, Hayden Operations, ASARCO LLC – kmcpeak@asarco.com 
Eddie Al-Rayes, Trinity Consultants, Inc. – ealrayes@trinityconsultants.com 
Matt Russell, PE, Gas Cleaning Technologies, LLC – russell@gcteng.com 
 
 

ASARCO LLC’s Comments on “National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: 
Primary Copper Smelting Residual Risk and Technology Review and Primary 
Copper Smelting Area Source Technology Review,” 87 Fed. Reg. 1616 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
 
 
 
 
Attachment 1 
 
Hayden Smelter Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol and EPA’s Approval of Protocol 

May 31, 2017 
Joseph A. Wilhelm 
General Manager 
Hayden Operations 
ASARCO LLC 
PO Box 8 
Hayden, AZ 85135 
UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 
REGION IX 
75 Hawthorne Street 
San Francisco, CA 94105-3901 
Re: 
Consent Decree No. CV-15-2206-PHX-JZB - Initial Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
Dear Mr. Wilhelm: 
The United States is in receipt of the initial fugitive emissions study protocol (Fugitive Emissions Study 
Protocol) submitted by ASARCO LLC (ASARCO). The Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol was 
originally submitted by ASARCO on June 15, 2016. The EPA provided comments on December 5, 
2016, and on January 20, 2017, ASARCO submitted an updated Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
addressing EPA's comments. 
By this letter, the EPA hereby notifies ASARCO that the updated Fugitive Emissions Protocol­
submitted on January 20, 2017-has been approved pursuant to Paragraph 31 of the above-captioned 
Consent Decree. 
Please contact Ryan Bickmore of the Office of Regional Counsel at 415-972-3058 or 
bickmore.rvan@epa.gov with any questions regarding this approval. 
Sincerely, 
(---,,L-Jc.---c;-vL___.... 
Matt Salazar, P.E. 
Manager, Air & TRI Section 
Enforcement Division 
EPA Region 9 - San Francisco 
Printed on I 00% Postconsumer Recycled Pape,: Process Chlorine Free. 

cc: 
Paul Gutermaim, Counsel for ASARCO LLC 
Jack Garrity, ASARCO LLC 
James Beers, DOJ 
Charles Aldred, EPA Region 9 
Ryan Bickmore, EPA Region 9 
Virginia Sorrell, EPA HQ 

 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
 
 
January 2017 
Version: 1   Rev: 2 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
 
 
(This page intentionally left blank) 
 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
1.0 
INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 4 
1.1 
Project Organization ......................................................................................... 5 
2.0 
FACILITY PROCESS DESCRIPTION .......................................................................... 8 
2.1 
Facility Modifications ....................................................................................... 9 
2.2 
Process Operations ........................................................................................ 10 
3.0 
STUDY ISSUES AND STRATEGY ............................................................................ 11 
3.1 
1994-1995 Study Results ................................................................................ 11 
3.2 
Study Design Issues ....................................................................................... 12 
3.3 
Study Plan Strategy ........................................................................................ 12 
4.0 
MONITORING SYSTEM DESCRIPTION ................................................................... 14 
4.1 
Parameterization ............................................................................................. 14 
4.2 
Monitoring Systems ........................................................................................ 15 
5.0 
MONITORING SYSTEM CONFIGURATION .............................................................. 21 
6.0 
SAMPLING SYSTEM OPERATION ........................................................................... 23 
7.0 
QUALITY ASSURANCE PLAN ................................................................................. 25 
7.1 
Calibrations ..................................................................................................... 27 
8.0 
DATA MANAGEMENT AND REPORTING ................................................................ 29 
9.0 
HEALTH AND SAFETY ............................................................................................. 31 
 
TABLES 
Table 3-1 
1994-1995 Study, Fugitive Emissions Results (lbs/hour)………………11 
Table 4-1 
Parameter Configuration…………………………………………………......19 
Table 4-2 
Preliminary Equipment and Spares List………………………………......20  
Table 6-1 
Monitoring Network O&M Schedule……………………………………......23 
Table 7-1 
Precision, Accuracy and Completeness Goals…………………………..25 
Table 7-2 
Study Calibration Equipment………………………………………………..27 
 
FIGURES 
Figure 1-1 
Project Organization…………………………………………………………….6     
Figure 2-1 
Simplified Primary Smelting Process Post-Converter Retrofit…………8     
Figure 5-1 
Roof Monitor and Exits Sampling Array……………………………………21   
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
 
 
DISTRIBUTION LIST 
Copies of the approved document “ASARCO LLC Hayden Operations Fugitive Emissions Study 
Protocol” and subsequent revisions are to be distributed to the persons listed below: 
To the United States: 
 
Chief, Environmental Enforcement Section 
Environment and Natural Resources Division 
U.S. Department of Justice 
Box 7611 Ben Franklin Station 
Washington, D.C. 20044-7611 
Re: DOJ No. 90-5-2-1-10459 
 
 
 
To EPA: 
 
Director, Air Enforcement Division 
 
 
Chief, Air and TRI Section 
Office of Civil Enforcement 
 
 
 
Enforcement Division 
U.S. EPA Headquarters, MC 2242A 
 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW 
 
 
 
Region 9 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
 
 
 
75 Hawthorne Street 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
San Francisco, CA 94105 
 
To ASARCO: 
 
ASARCO LLC  
 
 
 
 
ASARCO LLC  
 
Corporate Legal Department 
 
 
 
VP Environmental Affairs 
5285 E. Williams Circle, Suite 2000 
 
 
5285 E. Williams Circle, Suite 2000 
Tucson, AZ 85711 
 
 
 
 
Tucson, AZ 85711 
 
 
 
ASARCO LLC – Hayden Operations 
 
 
ASARCO LLC – Hayden Operations 
Hayden General Manager 
 
 
 
Hayden Technical Services Manager 
PO Box 8 
 
 
 
 
 
PO Box 8 
Hayden, AZ 85135 
 
 
 
 
Hayden, AZ 85135 
 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
4 
 
1.0 
INTRODUCTION 
Consent Decree No. CV-15-02206-PHX-DLR, entered by ASARCO LLC (Asarco) and 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), provides that Asarco shall conduct 
fugitive emissions studies of the Hayden Operations Copper Smelter in Hayden, 
Arizona. The Consent Decree (CD) requires an initial study to commence within 6 
months of completion of the Converter Retrofit Project, which must be completed by 
December 1, 2018. A follow-up study is also required after 5 years following conclusion 
of the initial study (Study). Part of the Study requirement is preparation and submittal of 
a draft protocol for EPA review by June 30, 2016. That requirement was satisfied. This 
document revision reflects EPA comments on the draft protocol received December 5, 
2016 with this revision due February 6, 2017. This submittal is intended to fulfill that 
requirement. 
The proposed Study design follows the previous 1994-1995 six-month fugitive emissions 
study as referenced in the CD. The focus of the 1994-1995 study was to characterize 
fugitive sulfur dioxide (SO2) emissions, fugitive particulate matter (PM) emissions, and 
selected fugitive PM metal Hazardous Air Pollutants (HAPs) emitted from the flash 
furnace, converter aisle, and anode furnaces building structures. The CD-required Study 
will use similar methodologies as in the previous study updated to address facility 
modifications, additional technical requirements, and to take advantage of new 
technologies. Objectives of the Study are to: 
• 
Develop post-retrofit fugitive SO2, PM, and PM metal HAPs emission factors 
• 
Determine potential surrogate parametric correlations between pollutants   
• 
Establish post-retrofit baseline fugitive emission levels for future comparison 
• 
Assist facility operations in control and management of fugitive emissions 
The Study is designed to quantify fugitive emissions of SO2 and PM. The parameters of 
interest include: 
• 
Sulfur dioxide (SO2) 
• 
Mass flux determined using exit velocity (Ve) and exit temperature (Te) 
• 
Total suspended particulate matter (PMTSP) 
• 
Inhalable PM (PM10) 
• 
Respirable PM (PM2.5) 
• 
PM metal HAPs (PMmetals) for arsenic (As), antimony (Sb), cadmium (Cd), 
chromium (Cr), lead (Pb), manganese (Mn), nickel (Ni), selenium (Se), cobalt 
(Co), beryllium (Be), and mercury (Hg) 
• 
Prototype open path optical density (OPD) 
Characterization of fugitive emissions will be for all primary copper smelting processing 
steps from the copper concentrate dryers through the anode casting department, 
inclusive of those end points, and the entire building(s) housing the smelting flash 
furnace, converter department, and anode furnaces. It will include characterization of 
process start-ups, shutdowns, and malfunctions that happen to occur during the Study. 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
5 
 
1.1 
Project Organization 
Asarco Hayden Operations personnel have the responsibility to ensure the Study 
satisfies the CD requirements. This includes selecting a qualified contractor as required 
by the CD. They have selected SLR International Corporation to prepare the Study 
protocol and conduct the Study (www.SLRConsulting.com). 
SLR is a privately held, global consulting and engineering company with 1200 
employees in 76 offices worldwide committed to providing environmental and 
engineering support to industry and government with a strong focus on providing expert 
air quality services. There are over 80 air quality engineers and scientists with a range of 
expertise across all air quality sub-discipline elements including: 
• 
Emissions Monitoring and Testing 
• 
Emissions Control Engineering 
• 
Ambient Air Quality Monitoring 
• 
Air Dispersion Modeling 
• 
Permitting and Compliance 
Study coordination and management will be provided from the SLR Fort Collins, 
Colorado Air Resources Laboratory with local support provided by a technician(s). The 
20-member Fort Collins lab is equipped with electronics and fabrication facility, titration 
and gravimetric laboratory, and a full complement of calibration and source testing 
equipment, tools, National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)-traceable 
calibration standards and measurement support systems. 
SLR’s Study team has decades of experience working together on complex air 
emissions and impact studies at industrial facilities throughout the US. This includes 
operational support on the now decommissioned Phelps Dodge Hidalgo Smelter in New 
Mexico and the Freeport-McMoRan Miami Smelter in Arizona including their fugitive 
emissions study efforts similar to the CD-required Study. Figure 1-1 depicts the Study 
organization. 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
6 
 
Figure 1-1 Asarco Hayden Smelter 
Fugitive Emissions Study 
Project Organization 
 
Key SLR members of the SLR Study team are described below. 
• 
Stephen Andersen will serve as Study Project Manager. He is an SLR Principal 
and a monitoring specialist with 44 years of experience in project design and 
implementation of integrated air quality resource management programs for a full 
range of industries and governments around the world. He is an air quality 
meteorologist expert in development, operations, quality assurance, and data 
analysis of measurement projects in remote and complex industrial settings.  
• 
Chris Johnson will serve as Study Field Monitoring Manager. He is a field 
engineer and logistics specialist with 31 years of experience conducting complex 
field and industrial facility measurement studies. He is expert in design, 
installation, O&M, and certification of continuous emissions monitoring systems 
and has substantial experience in the source testing of complex industrial 
processes. He is MSHA and OSHA certified and current. 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
7 
 
• 
John Rosburg will serve as Technical Advisor. He is an air quality specialist with 
30 years of experience in stack and fugitive emissions monitoring and control 
engineering efficiency testing for criteria pollutants, air toxics, and particulate. He 
is expert in copper smelter and metals refining process emissions and has 
substantial experience in Arizona conducting very similar work. He is MSHA and 
OSHA certified and current. 
• 
Peter Miller will serve as Study Data Manager. He is a senior air quality scientist 
with 23 years of experience in management and analysis of air quality and 
dispersion meteorology data. He has served as manager on many monitoring 
and modeling projects and has participated in copper smelter emissions testing. 
His expertise includes ensuring the quality assurance and quality control 
requirements and goals of measurement programs are met. 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
8 
 
2.0 
FACILITY PROCESS DESCRIPTION 
Figure 2-1 depicts a simplified flow diagram of the Hayden Operations primary copper 
(Cu) smelting process configuration after completion of the Converter Retrofit Project. It 
shows the potential sources of fugitive emissions.  
Figure 2-1 Asarco Hayden Operations Smelter 
Simplified Primary Smelting Process 
Post-Converter Aisle Retrofit Project 
 
 
The copper smelting process begins with furnace feed, a mixture of copper 
concentrate (~85%), silica flux (~10%) and recycled smelting byproducts (~5%), dried 
to < 1% moisture content in one of two concentrate dryers.  The dried feed is 
recovered in a product baghouse and subsequently introduced into the INCO Oxygen 
Flash Furnace along with 95% pure oxygen.  Combustible components of the feed 
(mainly sulfur) “flash” in the high temperature, high oxygen furnace atmosphere.  This 
exothermic reaction results in the feed mixture becoming a molten bath in the furnace 
that separates into a heavy, copper-containing matte layer and a lighter, ferro-silicate 
slag layer. The slag is “skimmed” from the top of the molten bath into a pot for 
disposal.  Copper matte (~50-60% Cu) is “tapped” from the bottom of the furnace 
through ventilated launders into 300 ft3 ladles (post retrofit capacity) for transfer into 
one of three new Peirce-Smith Converters. 
Copper matte is then converted to blister copper (~96-98% Cu) by injecting air and/or 
oxygen enriched air into the molten matte through tuyeres that are positioned below the 
surface of the molten bath when the converter is rotated to the “blowing” position. Silica 
flux is added to the bath to combine with iron and oxygen to produce slag, and the sulfur 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
9 
 
in the matte combusts to form SO2.  Cold materials consisting of scrap copper and 
reverts (ladle shells and converter aisle cleanup of spilled material) are added as 
appropriate to control converter temperature.  Slag produced by the converting process 
is returned to the flash furnace for additional copper recovery, and the SO2 created 
reports to the acid plant to become sulfuric acid.  The blister copper product is 
transferred by ladle to the anode furnaces. 
Blister copper from the converters is further refined in one of three anode furnaces by 
injecting air to oxidize any remaining sulfur and using natural gas to remove any excess 
oxygen. A natural gas fired burner in each vessel maintains proper temperature during 
refining and anode (99.5% Cu) casting. Refined anodes are shipped to the Asarco 
Copper Refinery in Amarillo, Texas. 
The Hayden Operations smelter is equipped with integrated air emissions control 
systems that are designed to capture SO2 and PM emissions at every step in the 
process. Dryer product baghouses and matte tapping-slag skimming ventilation gases 
are directed to a new vent gas baghouse for PM control. Flash furnace process gases 
are routed to the gas cleaning plant for PM removal and then on to the acid plant for SO2 
control. Converter off gases from blowing are collected in the converter primary 
ventilation system and also routed to the gas cleaning plant for PM removal and then on 
to the acid plant for SO2 control and production of sulfuric acid.  Emissions from 
converter secondary operations (transfer of matte and skimming of slag) are captured by 
the converter secondary hood ventilation system and routed to the secondary hood 
baghouse for PM control before exiting the annulus of the 1000’ stack. 
2.1 
Facility Modifications 
The facility will undergo major modifications over the next several years that will 
significantly reduce air emissions. A summary of changes relevant to potential fugitive 
emissions include: 
• 
The five existing converters will be replaced with three larger converters, making 
possible an operating schedule limited to a single converter blowing at any one 
time. This will better match the off gas volume from the converters to the gas 
processing capacity of the acid plant. 
• 
Better matching gas volumes from the converters with processing capacity of the 
acid plant, in combination with new, improved primary and secondary hoods, will 
reduce process gas spillage from the primary to secondary hood system during 
blowing operations. 
• 
A new tertiary ventilation system will capture other converter aisle emissions 
(e.g., ladle transfer). This modification also includes closing the roof monitors 
over the converter aisle, closing openings on the converter exterior wall, and 
additional sheeting to further isolate the converter aisle building from the flash 
furnace building. 
• 
Improvements will be made to the matte tapping and slag skimming ventilation 
system which will be routed to a new vent gas baghouse. This change will reduce 
fugitive emissions SO2 and particulate matter. 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
10 
 
2.2 
Process Operations 
Fundamental to the Study will be the ability to relate study measurements to facility 
operations and processes to determine various cause and effect relationships to 
observed concentrations at specific fugitive emission points. Pertinent facility process 
monitoring and emissions control operations are continuously monitored and recorded 
and will be available during the Study. This information includes but is not limited to: 
• 
Feed rates and natural gas firing rates to the concentrate dryers 
• 
Feed rate and oxygen rate to the flash furnace 
• 
Converter blast air and oxygen flow rates 
• 
Anode furnace air and natural gas rates 
• 
Ventilation system gas flow rates 
• 
Onsite dispersion meteorology data 
Also recorded and available to the Study are non-continuous/discrete indicators such as: 
• 
Ventilation systems damper positions 
• 
Batch process indicators (matte tapping, slag skimming, ladle transfers, etc.) 
• 
Integrated production totals at each stage 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
11 
 
3.0 
STUDY ISSUES AND STRATEGY 
Fugitive (Latin origin fugitīvus, meaning “fleeing away”) air emissions from a complex 
industrial process can potentially affect air quality at nearfield receptors downwind. This 
type of emission has escaped control and containment and therefore can potentially 
pose an acute and chronic exposure at nearby residences. This is the impetus for the 
Study. As discussed previously, the Hayden smelter facility will undergo significant 
modification in the next several years that will reduce all air emissions including these 
potential fugitive emissions. The purpose of the Study will be to demonstrate the 
reduction. 
3.1 
1994-1995 Study Results 
The CD requires Asarco conduct a 12-month fugitive emissions study of the Hayden 
primary smelter complex using similar or equivalent methodology as used in the 
previously conducted 1994-1995 study. That 6-month study attempted to characterize 
total fugitive air emissions of SO2, PM, and selected PM metals from the flash furnace, 
converter aisle, and anode furnaces. Results showed maximum average fugitive SO2 
emissions were from the converter aisle roof monitors with the anode furnaces showing 
the least amount of fugitive SO2. Conversely results also showed the anode furnaces 
area to have the highest average fugitive PM emissions.  
Table 3-1 provides a summary of relevant fugitive emission results in pounds per hour 
(lbs/hour) from the 1994-1995 fugitive emissions study. SO2 monitoring was for the 6-
month period September to February and the PM measurement were 5 months running 
October 1994 through February 1995. 
Table 3-1 Asarco Hayden Operations Smelter 
1994-1995 Study 
Fugitive Emissions Results (lbs/hour) 
Fugitive Emission 
Flash Furnace 
Converter Aisle 
Anode Furnaces 
SO2  
288 
525 
13 
PMTSP 
10.2 
5.8 
14.6 
As 
0.15 
0.14 
0.55 
Cd 
0.008 
0.006 
0.005 
Pb 
0.26 
0.39 
0.38 
Sb 
0.01 
0.03 
0.01 
Se 
0.04 
0.05 
0.49 
The anode furnaces, and to a lesser extent the flash furnace, appeared to be the major 
sources of PM on a total mass emissions basis during the study. The higher anode PM 
was likely due to carbon soot from the reduction cycle and condensable metal fine 
particulate off the furnaces as suggested by the higher measured Pb, As, and Se 
concentrations. This study was conducted before the anode furnace ventilation and 
baghouse system was installed in 2012. The relatively high flash furnace PM was 
expected to be associated with material handling and transfer at the concentrate dryers 
and furnace. This particulate loading is likely of relatively larger aerodynamic diameter 
with higher densities and therefore would not travel far from the smelter and fallout due 
to nearfield gravitational settling. Review of the seasonal distribution of maximum 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
12 
 
measured fugitive emissions rates showed highest average fugitive emissions rates 
were measured during winter months and westerly winds. 
The 1994-1995 study included assessment of the nearfield dispersion meteorology to 
determine potential location(s) of maximum air quality impact from smelter fugitive 
emissions. This was to ensure that ongoing ambient monitoring was sufficient to 
characterize local source-receptor relationships. As a part of the CD, Asarco is required 
to maintain the relevant nearby dispersion meteorology and ambient monitoring stations 
that will support Study data analysis. 
3.2 
Study Design Issues 
A comprehensive and successful study design to accurately characterize fugitive 
emissions from an operational facility must solve significant technical and logistical 
issues. These issues span the range from selecting proper equipment that can withstand 
the harsh exposures found inside a primary copper smelter to ensuring safe access to 
Study measurement locations by personnel servicing that equipment. These issues 
reflect the challenges identifying relevant fugitive emission sources and continuously 
capturing representative data to quantify those emissions specific to the parameters 
designated in the CD. The following is a summary list of Study design issues: 
Technical Issues 
• 
Identifying all relevant SO2 and PM fugitive emission points for monitoring 
• 
Accurately characterizing total mass flux through each fugitive emission exit 
• 
Developing SO2 and PM surrogate parameter correlations for extrapolation 
• 
Determining selected particulate metals concentrations of fugitive PM emissions 
• 
Demonstrating an effective means to continuously measure optical density 
• 
Ensuring all Study measurements are traceable back to authoritative standards 
Logistical Issues  
• 
Gaining safe access to all relevant fugitive emission points for instrumenting 
• 
Installing utilities, instrument shelters, support structures for sampling systems 
• 
Selecting equipment and support systems that can withstand harsh exposure 
• 
Determining placement, plumbing runs, and installing each sampling array 
• 
Servicing sampling array network and instrumentation on a routine basis  
• 
Accessing data collection systems remotely in near-realtime 
3.3 
Study Plan Strategy 
The Study plan strategy includes multiple phases that help to address these technical 
and logistical issues and lead to a final Study design. Details of the monitoring phases of 
this strategy are presented in subsequent sections of this protocol. Phases of the Study 
include: 
• 
Facility Reconnaissance – This phase was performed April 14-15, 2016. It was 
a facility walkthrough, access assessment, process review, data evaluation, and 
preliminary siting and study design meeting. It addressed equipment siting 
access 
needs, 
facility 
safety, 
logistical 
requirements, 
planned 
facility 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
13 
 
modifications, and review of previous study results, lessons learned, and 
supporting ambient monitoring program design. 
  
• 
Siting Confirmation Survey – This will be performed after the Converter Retrofit 
Project is complete but before commencing the one-year Study. It will include a 
minimum 5-day survey of the smelter complex using continuous recording 
Forward Looking Infrared Thermal Imaging (FLIR) camera-technology. The 
purpose of this survey is to verify candidate sampling array locations and identify 
relevant transient fugitive emission paths for inclusion into each facility sampling 
array. Multiple day/night viewing locations will be used to gain a 360⁰ perspective 
of the entire facility. This effort will also include identifying any additional 
infrastructure preparation required for the Study. 
 
• 
Intensive Monitoring – This will be an initial 60 day period of the Study for 
determining potential parametric correlations that can be used to enhance 
understanding of the surrogate relationships between fugitive SO2, PM, and PM 
metals emissions and between PM monitoring methodologies. It will involve 
higher frequency of manual PMTSP, PM10, and PM2.5 sample collection and 
laboratory analysis. An expanded discussion of the technical strategy associated 
with the Intensive Monitoring period is detailed in sections 4.0 Monitoring System 
Description, 5.0 Monitoring System Configuration, and 6.0 Sampling System 
Operation. 
 
• 
Continuous Monitoring – This final phase will be the remaining 10 months of 
the Study and will be continuous monitoring for fugitive SO2 and PM emissions; 
and velocity and temperature measurements in support of mass flux 
determination. This portion of the Study will also include a demonstration project 
using continuous open path opacity monitoring methodology for optical density 
measurements. The open path opacity instrument siting will be aided by results 
from the Intensive Study.  
 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
14 
 
4.0 
MONITORING SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
Fugitive air pollution emissions studies are generally unique from study to study and use 
a combination of source emissions monitoring methods, ambient measurements 
techniques, and site-specific strategies to accomplish study objectives. The Hayden 
Study will use similar or equivalent methodology as used in 1994-1995 study following 
EPA-established source measurement and ambient monitoring guidelines where 
applicable and good scientific judgement. These EPA guidance documents include: 
• 
Quality Assurance Handbook for Air Pollution Measurement Systems, Volume III 
Stationary Source Specific Methods, EPA-600/R-94/038c, September 1994 
 
• 
Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 60, Appendix A - Standards of 
Performance for New Stationary Sources, Reference Method 6C - Determination 
of Sulfur Dioxide Emissions from Stationary Sources (Instrument Analyzer 
Procedure) 
 
• 
40 CFR 60, Appendix B – Method 203 Determination of the Opacity of Emissions 
from Stationary Sources by Continuous Monitoring Systems (COMS) 
 
• 
40 CFR 60, Appendix B – Performance Specification 1 –Specifications and Test 
Procedures for Opacity Continuous Emission Monitoring Systems in Stationary 
Sources 
 
• 
Quality Assurance Handbook for Air Pollution Measurement Systems, Volume II - 
Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Program, EPA-454/B-13-003, May 2013 
 
• 
Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 53, Ambient Air Monitoring Reference and 
Equivalent Methods 
 
• 
Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 58 Appendix A – Quality Assurance 
Requirements for SLAMS, SPMs, and PSD Air Monitoring 
 
• 
Compendium of Methods for the Determination of Inorganic Compounds in 
Ambient Air, EPA/625/R-96/010a, June 1999. IO-3.3 - Determination of Metals in 
Particulate Matter Using X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF) Spectroscopy.  
These guidelines are intended to ensure data collection with known precision, accuracy, 
and bias while achieving the valid data capture (completeness) goals of the Study. 
Because the Study is a hybrid of both source and ambient monitoring, many 
conventional quality assurance requirements included in those guidelines simply do not 
apply. However, the Study design will ensure all measurements are traceable to the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) or other authoritative standard. 
4.1 
Parameterization 
The parameters of interest for the Study address the goal of characterizing fugitive air 
emissions from the Hayden Operations smelting process to develop appropriate 
emission factors and determine monitoring control effectiveness.  

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
15 
 
These parameters include: 
• 
SO2 
• 
Particulate Matter as PMTSP, PM10, and PM2.5 
• 
PM metals for As, Sb, Cd, Cr, Pb, Mn, Ni, Se, Co, Be, and Hg 
• 
Mass flux as exit velocity (Ve) and exit temperature (Te) 
• 
Open path optical density (OPD) 
SO2 and PM are the primary fugitive emissions from the flash furnace, converter aisle, 
and anode furnaces. PM metals are associated with the PM emissions. Measurement of 
mass flux is fundamental to calculating total fugitive emissions in terms of lbs/hour as a 
function of measured concentrations and the amount of accompanying air flow exiting 
those vents and building openings. Continuous visible plume measurement is a 
challenge for fugitive sources of large size because conventional opacity monitors have 
limited range (<20 meters) across an optical path.  The converter aisle-anode building 
alone is over 190 meters (m) long. Identifying and instrumenting visible fugitive plume 
exits as candidate locations for demonstrating automated optical density measurement 
methodology will be a part of the Study. 
4.2 
Monitoring Systems 
Study measurement systems and support equipment that will be used to conduct the 
Study are described herein and presented in Table 4-1 and 4-2. They include both 
continuous monitoring instruments and sensors, and manual sample collection and 
associated analytical methods. Model numbers and quantities listed are simply 
estimates subject to change based on final Study design and commercially available 
technology. 
SO2 
Continuous measurement of fugitive SO2 emissions will be made using stack gas 
monitoring-type instruments generally following EPA reference method 6C (RM6C) 
where applicable. These higher concentration source monitors will be used for emission 
points in the sampling array including roof monitors above the flash furnace and 
converter aisle building that includes the anode furnaces. Separately, an ambient 
monitor will be used to measure expected lower concentration emissions in near-
ambient air adjacent to the anode furnaces roof monitors for comparison to PM 
emissions as part of the correlation study. All SO2 monitors will be located in 
environmentally-controlled shelters at ground level. Sampling lines will be plumbed into 
each shelter. The source SO2 monitors will be EPA-accepted, field proven, continuous 
emission monitors (CEM). The ambient monitor will be an EPA-certified equivalent 
method instrument. 
RM6C provides for determination of SO2 concentrations by continuously extracting gas 
samples and directing a portion to an SO2 analyzer to measure the concentration (parts 
per million by volume). The SO2 measurement systems will be altered from RM6C as 
they will be equipped with multiple probe, filter, and flow assemblies to allow for 
collection and averaging of concentrations simultaneously at multiple locations. Sample 
gas will be drawn from each process-specific sampling array point at a constant flow rate 
and delivered equally to a sample manifold. Residence time will be kept to less than 10 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
16 
 
seconds at 10 liters per minute through a ½-inch Teflon sample line. The mixed sample 
gas in the manifold will be directed to a single instrument for analysis. This configuration 
will provide the average measured concentration of the fugitive emission array. Each 
sampling array will also be equipped with a set of data logger activated solenoid valves 
at the termination of each sampling line prior to entry into the sample manifold. This will 
allow isolation and delivery of sample gas from a single exit or subset of sampling points 
in that array into that station SO2 analyzer. This will provide option for conducting 
detailed evaluation of the relative mass loading of SO2 from each point in each sampling 
array. 
The SO2 sampling instrumentation will also include interconnected, portable SO2 
monitors that will be used to characterize technician-accessible, potential transient 
fugitive emission openings in the facility such as doorways and wall openings. These 
battery powered instruments provide continuous data collection and include self-
contained data acquisition and digital communication capability. Although they are not 
EPA-certified equivalent monitors, they will be calibrated to an authoritative standard 
traceable to NIST. Data collected with these systems will be used to scale these 
potential transient fugitive emissions. 
PM 
Unlike SO2 monitoring, which is a relatively stable and mobile gas, accurate 
measurement of PM is problematic primarily because the aerodynamic nature of the 
pollutant requires the sampler inlet be immediately located nearby the collection filter 
media or instrument detection system. Therefore, each sampling system must be 
located at the fugitive emission point. Measurements of particulate matter in the Study 
will be made using manual samplers in the sampling array in order to provide the 
needed filter sample media for elemental analysis of metals.  
A strategy to employ continuous PM monitors to support an SO2/PM correlation 
assessment will also be a part of the PM sampling strategy. This will also include 
collocating manual samplers with the continuous PM monitors located on the external 
instrument platform outside the anode furnace roof monitors (see Figure 5-1) or on the 
flash furnace. 
The manual PM samplers will be portable and battery powered Minivols equipped with 
47mm filters and particle size-select inlets with cut points at 10 microns (µ) and 2.5µ 
aerodynamic diameter. These low flow samplers, jointly developed by EPA are not an 
EPA-certified reference or equivalent method. However, sampling results have been 
documented to closely approximate data from Federal Reference Method samplers. 
PMTSP/PM10/PM2.5 filter samples collected with these instruments will be integrated 24-
hour samples. 
Continuous PM monitors will be used to support the SO2/PM correlation assessment. 
They will be automated, portable, beta attenuation-based instruments equipped with 
particle size-select inlets with cut points at 10µ and 2.5µ. A 2.5µ instrument has been 
certified by EPA as Equivalent Method with 10µ instrument certification in process. 
These instruments do not require operation in an environmentally controlled shelter 
which makes them well suited to support the Study. 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
17 
 
 
PMmetals 
Particulate metals samples will be collected with the MiniVol samplers without a size 
select inlet onto 47mm Teflon filters for analytical analysis by a certified laboratory to 
determine As, Sb, Cd, Cr, Pb, Mn, Ni, Se, Co, Be, and Hg concentrations from PMTSP. 
The MiniVol PM sample without a size select inlet provides TSP capture which is the 
maximum particulate load captured by this sampling method. PMTSP samples will be 
analyzed gravimetrically (for total PM mass) and by x-ray fluorescence (XRF) 
spectroscopy for elemental analysis following EPA Inorganic Compendium Analytical 
Laboratory Method IO-3.3. 
Mass Flux 
Determining total air flow volume through each fugitive emission exit point monitored is 
fundamental to accurately calculating the emission rate at that sampling location. This 
requires knowing the area of the opening and the velocity out of it. This will be 
accomplished by instrumenting each opening in the sampling array with a temperature 
sensor and either an axial flow sensor or pitot tube depending on accessibility and 
degree of sensitivity required. Openings in the sampling array that can be equipped with 
structural support will be provided with an axial flow sensor composed of a helicoid 
carbon fiber thermoplastic 4 bladed propeller turning a tach generator. For fugitive 
emissions vents where structural support cannot be constructed, a Pitot tube-type 
sensor will be used. The temperature sensors will be simple base metal type-K 
thermocouples. 
Optical Density 
One of the challenges facing the Study is determining the feasibility of continuous 
monitoring of visible plumes from smelter fugitive emissions at or near their exits. Typical 
continuous opacity measurement systems are designed for in-stack applications and use 
a fixed length optical path that is generally less than 15 meters in length to measure total 
light extinction across a process vent or exhaust stack cross section. However, potential 
visible plumes from fugitive emissions from the smelter can originate from multiple 
locations at different heights that span much longer path lengths.  
Development of a strategy for conducting a demonstration of automated fugitive 
emissions opacity monitoring during the Study will rely on results of the Siting 
Confirmation Survey performed after the Converter Retrofit Project is completed. This 
survey will rely on the data collected from the FLIR camera that will help identify 
potential candidate locations of visible fugitive emissions where an open path opacity 
continuous monitoring system could be deployed. The objectives of this demonstration 
would be to determine if this technology is viable and would benefit smelter operations 
and fugitive emissions control. Multiple candidate locations will be surveyed and 
equipped to receive the open path opacity instrumentation that will be tied into the 
nearest adjacent monitoring stations. It is anticipated that multiple deployments of this 
open path opacity monitoring system will occur during the duration of the Study. 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
18 
 
Support Systems 
The support equipment needed to conduct the Study includes systems to house 
instrumentation, extract fugitive emissions, and ensure collection of valid data traceable 
to NIST or other authoritative standard. In addition a full complement of equipment 
spares and expendable supplies for one year of operation will be supplied to ensure 
maximum valid data collection. 
The SO2 monitors will be rack mounted and installed in 8’x8’x8’ environmentally-
controlled shelters equipped with HVAC systems, line voltage conditioners, digital data 
loggers, station computer, cell or radio telemetry link, and gas calibration systems. The 
shelters will be corrosion resistant and include workspace and facility for field operations 
personnel equipment, maintenance, and spare supplies. SO2 sample gas from each 
location will be brought to a central sample manifold and mixed equally and transported 
to the analyzer. Each sample line will be equipped with a replaceable filter inlet to protect 
the pumps, solenoid valves and individual flow controllers. The inlet lines will converge 
into a single manifold with a sample pump and series of valves to control instrument 
calibrations. Each shelter will be supplied with multi-stage gas regulators and EPA-
traceable SO2 calibration gas cylinders and zero air supply. The data collection platform 
will include a station-dedicated digital data logger, data communication link, and a 
station computer system.  
The manual PM samplers will each be supplied with battery charging systems and spare 
batteries. Included will be sample filter cassettes and sample storage containers. 
Sampler and probe hangers will be installed at all locations in the sampling array. 
The open path opacity monitoring systems will be equipped if needed with optional 
fiberglass weather covers for the transmitter and receiver to allow for both inside and 
potential outdoor deployment. 
The thermal imagining system that will be used during the Siting Confirmation Survey to 
identify potential relevant transient fugitive emission paths to be added to the sampling 
arrays will be a FLIR camera. This survey will be performed over multiple days after the 
Converter Retrofit Project is complete. The camera type that will be used is for 
automation and process control and can provide instantaneous and time lapsed images 
of thermal discontinuities typical of smelter fugitive emissions signatures.  
Site Preparation 
Study design will require substantial infrastructure development to provide routine 
access to all significant potential fugitive emission points in the smelter complex. This 
includes catwalk construction below the roof monitors in the anode-converter building, 
utility development at locations requiring electric power for continuous monitors, outside 
roof walkway expansion for placement of instrumentation, and various access changes 
to accommodate sensors and sampling line runs. These preparations will be in advance 
of the Study and where possible integrated into the planned smelter modifications. 
Additional site preparations may be required to accommodate modifications/additions to 
the sampling array and instrumentation once the Study is underway. 

Ms. Amy Veek 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
19 
 
 
TABLE 4-1 
Asarco Hayden Operations  
Fugitive Emissions Study 
Parameter Configuration 
 
Parameter 
Manufacturer/Model 
Sample 
Frequency 
Averaging 
Period 
Measurement 
Range 
Lower 
Detection 
Limit 
Method 
Sulfur Dioxide 
(Source SO2) 
AMETEK Process Instruments 
Model 9900RM 
Continuous 
1-hour 
0-1000 ppm 
(selectable) 
2 ppm 
Non-Dispersive UV Photometric 
Sulfur Dioxide 
(Ambient SO2) 
Thermo Fisher Scientific 
Model 43i 
Continuous 
1-hour 
0-2000 ppb 
(selectable) 
0.5 ppb 
Pulsed Fluorescence 
Particulate Matter 
(PMTSP/PM10/PM2.5) 
Met One Instruments 
Model E-BAM 
Continuous 
1-hour 
0-104 µg/m3 
2.5 µg/m3 
Cyclone Size Select Inlet 
Scintillation Probe Beta Attenuation 
Particulate Matter 
(PMTSP/PM10/PM2.5) 
(PMmetals) 
AirMetrics 
Model MiniVol TAS 
3/6 Day 
24-hour 
0 to 500 µg/m3 
2 µg/m3 
Size Select Impactors - 47mm Filter 
Gravimetric and XRF Spectroscopy 
Axial Flow 
Mass Flux Sensor 
R.M. Young Company 
Gill Propeller Anemometer 
Model 27106T 
Continuous 
1-hour 
-35 m/s to 
35 m/s 
±0.3 m/s 
Four Blade Helicoid Propeller 
Tach Generator Transducer 
Axial Flow 
Mass Flux Sensor 
Dwyer Instruments Incorporated 
Model 160S-24 
Continuous 
1-hour 
N.A. 
N.A. 
S-type Pitot Tube 
Stainless Steel 
Exit Temperature 
Watlow Electric Manufacturing 
Company 
Type K 
Continuous 
1-hour 
0 to 1260 ⁰C 
N.A. 
Base Metal Thermocouple 
Optical Density 
(Demonstration 
Sensor) 
MIP Cemtrex, Inc. 
Laser Dust Monitor 
Model LM3189 
Continuous 
5-minutes 
0-99% Opacity 
1% 
Open Path 
Chopped Class II Laser (655nm) 
Single Pass Extinction 
Portable SO2 
Monitors 
Dräeger Safety Inc. 
Model X-zone 5500 and X-am 
5600 w/ Sensor XXS SO2 
Continuous 
5 minutes 
0 to 100 ppm 
0.1 ppm 
Battery Powered Infrared 
Electrochemical 
 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
20 
 
 
TABLE 4-2 
Asarco Hayden Operations  
Fugitive Emissions Study 
Preliminary Equipment and Spares List 
 
System 
Quantity 
Function 
Air Quality Systems 
SO2 (source) 
4 
Continuous SO2 Monitoring 
SO2 (ambient) 
1 
Continuous SO2 Monitoring 
Zero Air Supply 
4 
SO2 Calibration Clean Air Supply 
Reference Gas Cylinder 
60 
SO2 Calibration Protocol 1 Gas 
Gas Pressure Regulator 
6 
Calibration Gas Cylinder Regulator 
Manifold System 
4 
SO2 Source Sample Extraction 
Solenoid Valves 
20 
Vent-specific Spot Sampling 
Gas Dilution Unit 
1 
Mass Flow Controlled Calibration 
PM2.5/PM10/PMTSP 
3 
Continuous PM Monitoring 
PM2.5/PM10/PMTSP 
25 
PM2.5/PM10/PMTSP/PMmetals Sampling 
Opacity 
1 
Open-Path Continuous Opacity Monitoring 
SO2 (portable) 
3 
Portable Continuous SO2 Monitoring 
Mass Flux Systems 
Axial Flow Monitors 
50 
Flow Velocity Measurement 
Temperature 
30 
Exit Temperature Measurement  
Data Acquisition Systems 
Data Logger 
5 
Digital Data Collection and Averaging 
Modem 
5 
Remote Telecomm Interface 
Radio Antenna 
5 
Remote Telecomm Antenna 
Station Computer 
4 
Local Data Access and Back-up 
Polling Computer 
2 
Control Room Near Realtime Data  
Support Systems 
8x8 Instrument Shelter 
4 
Environmentally Controlled Shelter 
Electric Power Conditioner 
4 
Line Voltage Regulation 
MiniVol Batteries 
50 
PM Sampler Power Supply 
MiniVol Battery Charger 
25 
PM Sampler Power Recharging System 
PM Sample Cassettes 
50 
47mm Filter Holders 
 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
21 
 
5.0 
MONITORING SYSTEM CONFIGURATION 
The Study sampling array will be supported by three instrument shelters; one at the flash 
furnace, one at the south end of the converter aisle, and one at the anode furnaces area. 
Each instrument shelter will be centrally located to the process-specific sampling array. 
Additionally, a fourth data collection platform will be installed on an outside platform 
above and adjacent to the anode furnaces roof monitors during the intensive data 
collection portion of the Study. Also as a part of the optical density demonstration 
component of the Study, an open-path opacity monitor will be self-contained with its own 
weather cover and data logger and telemetry for placement either inside or outside the 
smelter at select locations of highest potential fugitive particulate emissions detected by 
the sampling array.  
Based on review of preliminary construction plans, 19 roof monitor and building exit 
opening sampling points have been identified for the Study sampling array with an 
additional two to four sampling locations anticipated to be added to the flash furnace 
area. These additional flash furnace sampling locations will be below roof height at open 
vent areas above the furnace matte tapping and slag skimming process. Specific 
locations will be identified during the Siting Confirmation Survey phase of Study 
preparation as previously discussed. Figure 5-1 provides an illustration of the potential 
fugitive emissions source geometry and roof monitor and exits sampling array. 
Figure 5-1 Asarco Hayden Operations Smelter 
Fugitive Emissions Study 
Roof Monitor and Exits Sampling Array  
 
 
The SO2 sampling array configuration is designed to provide total potential SO2 fugitive 
emissions from each major copper smelter process source. The flash furnace process-
specific sampling array SO2 source instrument will measure total fugitive SO2 emissions 
from the furnace roof monitors which also vent the concentrate dryers. The flash furnace 
station will be equipped with a second SO2 source instrument to measure total SO2 
fugitive emissions from other non-roof monitor emission exits. The anode furnaces 
station roof monitor array will capture potential fugitive emissions from the anode 
furnaces and any potentially uncaptured converter aisle fugitives from that side of the 

Ms. Amy Veek 
 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
22 
 
building including any emissions escaping through the open north end building exit. The 
south end of the converter aisle will be equipped with a separate station for 
measurement of potential fugitive emissions through the single roof monitor and open 
south end building exit.  
PM monitoring will essentially use the same process-specific sampling array locations as 
for SO2 with varying configurations based on accessibility, SO2 observations, and data 
trends. PM monitoring will primarily be manual 24-hour integrated samples collected 
every 3 days during the 60 day Intensive Monitoring phase and every 6 days thereafter. 
The monitoring array will also be equipped with an external building SO2/PM instrument 
platform immediately east of the anode furnace area roof monitors near their exit height. 
This platform will be used to assist in determining potential surrogate relationship 
between fugitive SO2 emissions and PM emissions. Additionally, prevailing westerly 
daytime winds will increase the frequency of potential plume impingement at that 
platform location. The platform will be equipped with continuous PM monitors that do not 
require housing in an environmentally controlled shelter. The associated SO2 sample line 
run will be to an ambient SO2 analyzer in the anode furnaces station shelter immediately 
below the platform. 
The demonstration open path optical density monitoring system will be an open path 
continuous opacity monitor set up to transect  highest particulate concentration fugitive 
plume exits as determined during the Intensive Monitoring and Continuous Monitoring 
phases of the Study. It is anticipated that a single system will be deployed at multiple 
locations during the Study. The purpose of this demonstration is to determine the 
practicality of employing this technology to minimize smelter fugitive emissions by 
detecting process-related events and alerting operators in near-realtime. Because this 
technology will require infrastructure support, several candidate locations will be 
identified during the Siting Confirmation Survey so that site preparations can be 
completed before the start of the Study. Data from the open path continuous opacity 
monitoring systems will be continuously available in near-realtime to operations and 
archived for further analysis.  
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
23 
 
6.0 
SAMPLING SYSTEM OPERATION 
The Study design is a combination of fully automated continuous measurement systems 
and manual PM samplers. Once the sampling array and support systems are installed, 
tested, and become fully operational, Study network operations and maintenance will be 
supported by an onsite instrument technician(s) with ongoing and on-call assistance 
from project field operations, data management, and project management personnel. 
During the Intensive Monitoring portion of the Study, manual 24-hour integrated PM 
samples will be collected at three day intervals and then switched to an ever 6-day 
frequency during the Continuous Monitoring period following the EPA 6-day sampling 
schedule. Collocated PM sampling will be included during both periods, bi-weekly during 
the Intensive Monitoring period and monthly thereafter. A sampling day 47mm sample 
filter field blank will accompany each exposed filter batch for analysis. All other 
instrumentation will be collecting continuous data as presented in Table 3-1. 
During the intensive and continuous monitoring phases of the Study, the SO2 monitoring 
effort will include periodically isolating the potential relative mass loading of SO2 from 
each sampling point in each sampling array. There will be a data logger controlled 
solenoid valve on each sample line into each array station manifold. Each station data 
logger will be capable of being programmed to close all sample inlets into the array 
manifold and then cycle through sampling each inlet independently for a pre-determined 
duration and frequency on a pre-programmed basis. These programs will be configured 
based on sampling results, process activities, visual observations, or meteorological 
conditions. 
The network O&M schedule is presented in Table 6-1. It shows the frequency of 
expected routine servicing and preventative maintenance for each measurement 
system. These systems will be exposed to a relatively harsh operating environment and 
therefore the frequencies may change over time. All monitor calibrations and 
replacements will be NIST-traceable. 
TABLE 6-1 
Asarco Hayden Operations Fugitive Emissions Study 
Monitoring Network O&M Schedule 
Activity 
Daily 
Weekly 
Bi-weekly 
Monthly 
Quarterly 
Network Inspection and Servicing 
X 
 
 
 
 
Network Performance Data Assessment 
X 
 
 
 
 
SO2 Analyzer Zero/Span  
X 
 
 
 
 
SO2 Probe Particulate Filter Replacement 
 
X 
 
 
 
SO2 Monitor Multipoint Calibration 
 
 
 
 
X 
Manual PM Sampler Filter Collection1 
 
X 
 
 
 
Manual PM Sampler Calibration Check1 
 
X 
 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
24 
 
PM Filter Shipment to Analytical Lab 
 
 
X 
 
 
Mass Flux Axial Flow Sensor Replacement 
 
 
 
X 
 
Mass Flux Temperature Calibration Check 
 
 
 
 
X 
Portable SO2 Sampler Deployment  
 
 
 
X 
 
Portable SO2 Sampler Calibration 
 
 
X 
 
 
Automated PM sampler Zero and Flow Check 
 
 
X 
 
 
Optical Density Monitor Deployment 
 
 
 
 
X 
Optical Density Monitor Inspection/Servicing 
 
X 
 
 
 
Optical Density Monitor Calibration 
 
 
 
X 
 
1 Every 3 days during Intensive Monitoring period 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
25 
 
7.0 
QUALITY ASSURANCE PLAN 
Quality assurance (QA) procedures that will be used in the Study will generally follow 
EPA guidance as previously referenced where applicable. The O&M schedule listed in 
Table 6-1 provides the quality control steps that will be implemented for the Study. The 
Study is intended to provide unbiased, representative quantification of total smelter 
fugitive emissions of SO2 and PM with known accuracy and precision. This QA plan 
describes the procedures, control limits, data acceptance criteria, and quality control. 
These elements include: 
Representativeness – The Study sampling array and continuous sampling strategy will 
be chosen to characterize total potential fugitive air emissions from the flash furnace 
building, converter aisle, and anode furnaces during routine operations as well as start-
up, shut down, and process malfunctions that happen to occur during the study 
timeframe. All Study sampling points within the smelter structure will be given a unique 
identifier to ensure that all data collected are paired to a specific location within the 
facility. 
Comparability – SO2 and PM data collected by the sampling network will be comparable 
on an inter-network basis and with expected conditions based on process activities and 
meteorological events. Appropriate collocated and field blank/replicate PM samples will 
provide additional comparability. 
Completeness - Study valid data recovery on a parameter-specific basis is in excess of 
monthly minimums of 80% for all air quality and mass flux parameters. Preventative 
maintenance and complement of spare parts will be maintained to ensure goals are met. 
Accuracy – Study data accuracy is maintained in compliance with EPA requirements 
through strict routine system assessment, preventive service and maintenance, and a 
comprehensive calibration program. All calibration equipment will be maintained certified 
traceable to NIST or other authoritative standard where applicable. 
The QA objectives for the Study are listed in Table 7-1 with calculations to follow. 
TABLE 7-1 
Precision, Accuracy and Completeness Goals 
Parameter 
Precision 1 
Accuracy 2 
Completeness3 
SO2 (source) 
≤ ±10% of input value 
Monthly reported 95% 
probability limits < ±10% 
Slope ≥ 0.90 and ≤ 1.10 
Intercept within ±2% of full 
scale R2 > 0.995 
≥ 80% 
SO2 (ambient) 
≤ ±10% of input value 
Monthly reported 95% 
probability limits < ±10% 
Slope ≥ 0.90 and ≤ 1.10 
Intercept within ±2% of full 
scale R2 > 0.995 
≥ 80% 
SO2 (Portable) 
NA 
≤± 2% of measured value and 
zero point ≤± 0.2 ppm 
≥ 80% 
PM (continuous) 
Coefficient of variation ≤10% 
per month 
Temp ± 2ºC, press ±10mm of 
Hg, flow rate, ± 5% (design) 
≥ 80% 

Ms. Amy Veek 
 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
26 
 
Shelter Temperature 
≤ ±2°C std. dev.(24 hours) 
≤ ±2°C of reference 
≥ 90% 
Axial Flow 
NA 
± (0.2 m/s + 5% of observed) 
≥80% 
Flux Temperature 
NA 
≤±2⁰C 
≥80% 
Optical Density 
NA 
TBD 
≥75% 
1 Based on daily automatic and manual span checks except PM and shelter temperature 
2 Based on calibrations 
3 per month basis 
SO2 Precision 
The percentage difference (di) for each SO2 analyzer precision check is determined by: 
where: 
Yi = the indicated concentration of the analyzer from the ith precision check 
Xi = known concentration of the test gas used for the ith precision check 
The average percent difference (đj) and the standard deviation (Sj) of the percent 
difference for each SO2 analyzer are calculated using the following equations: 
                  
 
where n is the number of precision checks performed during the period for each 
instrument. 
The 95 percent probability limits for single analyzer precision are calculated as follows: 
Upper 95 Percent Probability Limit =   
Lower 95 Percent Probability Limit =   
Accuracy 
Accuracy will be assessed during routine calibrations performed during the period. 
Accuracy is defined as the percent difference between the designated input value and 
the observed instrument response. 
Data Completeness 
The data completeness or recovery percentage Pi for each parameter is determined by: 
where: 
hν = number of hours of valid data  
ht = total hours in the period 
d
n
d  ,
j
i
i
n
=
=∑
1
1
S   n   
d   n 
d
 
 
j
i
2
i
n
i
i
n
2
=
−
−




















=
=
∑
∑
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
P   h
h   
t
v
t
=
× 100
d   Y   X
X
i
i
i
i
=
−
× 100
d
S
j
j
+ 196
.
d
S
j
j
−196
.

Ms. Amy Veek 
 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
27 
 
7.1 
Calibrations 
Instrument and sensor calibrations are required to reduce possible systematic bias and 
ensure collection of data with known accuracy and precision.  The onsite technician(s) 
and project field engineers will perform calibrations of the SO2 monitors on at least a 
quarterly basis or when automatic daily zero and span checks indicate recalibration is 
needed. The PM samplers will be calibration checked by the onsite technician(s) daily 
both before and after each sample is collected. The continuous PM monitors will be 
calibration checked every two weeks by the onsite technician(s). The axial flow 
measurement sensors will be replaced with rebuilt and recalibrated sensors monthly. 
The sampling array temperature sensors will be calibration checked on a quarterly basis.  
Operation of the demonstration optical density monitor will not strictly follow 40 CFR Part 
60 Appendix B Performance Specifications 1 because the application and operating 
conditions will not allow that level of documented precision and accuracy. However, 
QA/QC guidance contained therein will be applied where practical including periodic 
upscale and zero calibration checks.  
All calibration records will be reviewed by the Project Manager and Data Manager who 
have knowledge of all Study procedures but no direct involvement with actual 
calibrations. Calibration checks are conducted if any one of the following criteria is met: 
• 
On the schedule presented in Table 6-1 
• 
After service activity or corrective action that may alter instrument response 
• 
SO2 analyzer span deviates by more than ±10 percent from designated value 
• 
SO2 analyzer or sensor is physically moved 
• 
There is indication of potential malfunction in any data collection system 
• 
Prior to removal of any instrument or sensor that is still operational 
• 
Immediately following installation of a replacement instrument or sensor 
All calibrations conform to QA guidance referenced in Chapter 1. Calibrations will be 
performed according to applicable equipment SOPs as developed to meet requirements 
of EPA regulatory guidelines for traceability and documentation. Table 7-2 provides a list 
of calibration equipment that will be used during the Study.  All test equipment used for 
calibrations is maintained and calibrated on a regular basis.  Records providing 
traceability to the NIST or other authoritative standards for all equipment used to adjust 
monitoring systems will be maintained for disclosure. 
TABLE 7-2 
Asarco Hayden Fugitive Emissions Study  
Calibration Equipment 
Calibration Equipment 
Certified digital multi-meter 
Certified PM flow calibration system 
NIST-Traceable calibration gas 
NIST-traceable temperature standard 
Zero and upscale opacity filters 
Zero air calibration gas 

Ms. Amy Veek 
 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
28 
 
Gas dilution NIST-traceable flow meters 
Insulated temperature baths 
Variable speed motors 
Torque gauge 
Documentation of all site visits will be provided through several forms. A sampling array 
network log and checklists will be maintained at each monitoring station detailing 
inspection, PM sampling, system calibrations, and repair activities. Corrective Action 
forms will be used to track any operational issues that may arise. Records and 
measurements taken during calibrations will be recorded on forms specifically designed 
for each respective instrument. Calibrations will also be documented digitally and with 
hardcopies. The Project Manager and Project Field Manager will be responsible for 
verifying project forms are properly completed and filed. All relevant project forms will be 
included with quarterly data reports and archived with project files. 
The continuous SO2 analyzers (source and ambient instruments) will be multi-point 
calibrated at least quarterly by the Project Monitoring Manager or a project field 
engineer. Multi-point calibrations consist of challenging the instruments with known 
concentrations at approximately 25, 55, and 90 percent of full scale. Linearity over the 
sampling range will be checked and adjustments made as needed to bring analyzer 
response within project accuracy goals. 
The portable SO2 instruments will be calibration checked at the beginning and end of 
each deployment and at least bi-weekly. These calibration checks will include zero and a 
SO2 level near the upper range of expected measured fugitive concentrations (≤20 ppm). 
Automatic zero/span checks will be performed daily.  No automatic adjustments occur; 
however, the information is used to detect sudden malfunctions or changes in calibration 
that may warrant unscheduled maintenance. Span check concentrations will be set at 
approximately 90 percent of the instrument full-scale response. Calibration, zero, and 
span gas will be introduced as close to the sample inlet locations as possible ensuring 
that the calibration gas passes through all filters, pumps, and flow meters and most of 
each samples line. 
SO2 monitor shelter temperatures will be continuously monitored and maintained 
between 15 and 35 °C to satisfy EPA certification specifications. The targets for 
maintaining shelter temperature will be set between 20 and 30°C.  Each station shelter 
temperature sensor will be calibration checked quarterly using an NIST-traceable 
thermometer. 
Each manual PM sampler will be supplied with a recharged battery and calibration 
checked with a certified PM flow calibration system prior to and after each sample is 
collected. Samples will be collected over a 24-hour period, midnight-to-midnight, ±60 
minutes. Approximately, 10% of the samples collected will have a collocated sample for 
precision assessment of the methodology from sample pre-weight through laboratory 
analysis. Collocated PM samples should maintain an average percent difference within 
±15%. The certified analytical laboratory that doing the sample analysis will be supplied 
with approximately 5% field blanks. Collocated collected filter samples and field blanks 
will be provided blind to the laboratory. 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
29 
 
8.0 
DATA MANAGEMENT AND REPORTING 
All Study data will be accessible in near-realtime via telecommunication interface to the 
Study data loggers with the exception of the manual PM samplers. Each Study network 
monitoring array station will be equipped with a digital data logger, station computer, and 
radio telemetry link that will allow data to be automatically polled and remotely 
downloaded into an offsite central data management system and smelter facility control 
room computer. The data communication system will also be designed to allow control 
and diagnostic evaluation of each air quality analyzer. All continuous air quality monitors 
will record and store its own data as back-up to the data loggers in the event of failure. 
Zero, span, and calibration data will be automatically captured, stored, and downloaded 
daily. As a quality control step a record of current sensor/sampling locations (identifiers) 
will be carefully documented by the onsite technician on a daily sampling log form and 
maintained to accompany all sampling and data collection efforts. 
Each data logger will sample all continuous monitors in their process-specific sampling 
array every second and compute and store 5-minute and hourly averages. The polling 
computers will automatically interrogate the Study network data loggers every hour. 
Every business day the onsite technician(s) and a project data management analyst will 
review the data and assess network performance. In the event an unresolved anomaly 
or measurement system failure is detected, notification will be made to the Monitoring 
Manager and Project Manager and a mitigation plan will be formulated to address the 
issue. All daily assessment and mitigation plans will be documented and follow-up 
verified. 
Original Study digital data records will be appended into complete monthly files and 
retained for reference. Separate working files will be made from the original appended 
files for validation. The data validation process will be conducted monthly and will 
include assessment of zero/span/calibration results, internetwork comparisons or 
observed data, review of smelter process records, and dispersion meteorological 
conditions recorded during the period. Edits to the database will be made that will 
include appropriate corrections and deletions. These will be documented for reference. 
Manually collected PM sample filters will be collected on an every 6-day basis (every 3 
days during Intensive Study) following the EPA sampling schedule for comparison to 
nearby ambient collected data. Each unexposed 47mm Teflon filter batch will be 
submitted to the analytical laboratory for serial numbering and gravimetric pre-weight. 
Chain-of-Custody forms will be prepared upon receipt of each unexposed batch that will 
follow each sample day batch. During each PM sample day the onsite technician (s) will 
record on a digital Chain-of-Custody template each filter serial number, sample array ID 
number, and all relevant sampling information (e.g., date, elapse time, pre- and post-
calibration flow, observed filter condition, etc.) using a portable computer tablet that will 
be downloaded into a station computer, stored, and printed out for transfer with the 
exposed filters to the laboratory for gravimetric and XRF analysis approximately every 
two weeks. Analytical results will be assessed and entered into the project data base 
upon receipt. 
Approximately two weeks following the end of each month, a Study progress report will 
be generated for distribution that will communicate preliminary network valid data 
retrieval statistics, significant events, QA results, and data summaries. Process related 
information will be incorporated into these progress reports where relevant. 

Ms. Amy Veek 
 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
30 
 
Approximately 30 days following the intensive 60-day data collection portion of the 
Study, a data report will be prepared that will provide detailed discussion of observed 
data trends relative to process events, surrogate parametric relationships, and any 
recommendations of potential changes that should be made for the remainder of the 
Study. 
At the conclusion of the Study, a final report will be prepared and submitted that will 
provide a detailed summary of results. This will include discussion of observed fugitive 
emissions to process activities, development of facility-specific fugitive emission factors 
with back-up computations, discussion of feasibility and results of demonstration 
monitoring strategies, recommendations for ongoing monitoring, and summary of all data 
collected. All original and validated data files will be transferred with the final report. 
 
 

Ms. Amy Veek 
 
 
Fugitive Emissions Study Protocol 
 
January 2017 
 
31 
 
9.0 
HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Conducting the Study will be potentially dangerous to field personnel because of the 
exposure to heights, hazardous gases, high temperatures, and moving process 
equipment all inherent in an operational primary copper smelter. Preparation of safe 
access to all monitoring points in the sampling array will be completed during the 
converter retrofit project and other associated facility modifications prior to installation of 
the network. Other preparations needed for the Study will be determined based on the 
Siting Confirmation Survey. 
All sampling points will be equipped with safety railing and anchor points for fall 
protection. Monitoring will not be conducted at facility locations that are not safely 
accessible. 
An important part of Study preparation will also be development and implementation of a 
strict health and safety (H&S) plan. This project H&S plan will integrate Asarco facility 
H&S requirements with Study-specific elements. It will address: 
• 
Minimum training and certification requirements 
• 
Emergency contact list 
• 
Incident reporting guidelines 
• 
Contaminants of Concern 
• 
Project hazards identification and risk assessment 
• 
Job safety analysis 
• 
Minimum personal protection equipment 
 
These elements will become part of the field operations project operating procedures. 
 

 
 

ASARCO LLC’s Comments on “National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: 
Primary Copper Smelting Residual Risk and Technology Review and Primary 
Copper Smelting Area Source Technology Review,” 87 Fed. Reg. 1616 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
 
 
 
 
Attachment 2 
 
Discussion between EPA and Asarco Regarding Achievability of Subpart QQQ 
Numeric Emissions Limits During Periods of Startup and Shutdown 

From: Amy Veek  
Sent: Tuesday, April 21, 2020 12:30 PM 
To: Dawson, Tonisha <dawson.tonisha@epa.gov> 
Subject: RE: Asarco Hayden Smelter Modeling Inputs 
 
Hi Tonisha, 
 
I hope everything is good with you at this time. Additionally, I appreciate you 
giving Asarco the opportunity to voice any concerns regarding potential SSM 
issues. Pursuant to our conference call on April 8 and in further response to your 
March 31 e-mail (below this e-mail) I’ve outlined some SSM items to consider: 
 
1. If Subpart QQQ were to be revised to require that continuous monitoring data 
be used to demonstrate compliance with the nonsulfuric acid PM numeric 
standard applicable to smelting furnace process off-gas and converter system 
process off-gas, then Asarco believes the numeric standard presently at § 
63.1444(b)(1) and (d)(5) would need to be revised in order to account for 
those off-gas emissions that occur during periods of startup and 
shutdown.  That said, Asarco believes that it would be impossible to generate 
continuous monitoring data that could be used to demonstrate compliance 
with the nonsulfuric acid PM numeric standard applicable to smelting furnace 
process off-gas and converter system process off-gas. 
 
2. If Subpart QQQ were to be revised to require that continuous monitoring data 
be used to demonstrate compliance with the opacity standard applicable to 
visible emissions exiting the roof monitors or roof exhaust fans on the building 
housing the copper converter department, then Asarco believes the opacity 
standard presently at § 63.1444(d)(4)(i) would need to be revised in order to 
account for those visible emissions that occur during periods of: 
 
a. Startup and shutdown; 
 
b. Periods of non-blowing (that is, when air or oxygen-enriched air is not 
introduced into any of the batch copper converter furnace molten baths 
through tuyeres that are submerged below the level of the molten bath); 
and 
 
c. Periods during blowing when one or more of the interference events listed 
in § 63.1450(c)(7)(iii)(A) through (F) is occurring: 
 
(A) Charging of copper matte, reverts, or other materials to a batch copper 
converter; 
 

(B) Skimming slag or other molten materials from a batch copper 
converter; 
 
(C) Pouring of blister copper or other molten materials from a batch 
copper converter; 
 
(D) Return of slag or other molten materials to the flash smelting furnace 
or slag cleaning vessel; 
 
(E) Roll-out or roll-in of the batch copper converter; 
 
(F) Smoke and fumes generated inside the converter building by 
operation of the smelting furnace, the slag cleaning vessel (if used), 
anode refining and casting processes that drift into the copper 
converter department. 
 
That said, it is presently unclear whether it would be possible to generate 
continuous monitoring data that could be used to demonstrate compliance 
with the opacity standard applicable to visible emissions exiting the roof 
monitors or roof exhaust fans on the building housing the copper converter 
department. 
 
3. If Subpart QQQ were to be revised to incorporate standards other than the 
numeric and opacity standards that are presently imposed in Subpart QQQ, 
then the question of whether such standards could be achieved or compliance 
with such standards could be empirically demonstrated would depend on the 
standard in question and whether data could feasibly be generated to 
demonstrate the compliance. 
 
Attached for your convenience is a simplified gas flow diagram for the Hayden 
smelter. 
 
If you have any questions, please don’t hesitate to let me know. 
 
Best regards, 
Amy Veek 
Environmental Manager 
ASARCO Hayden Operations 
Office: 520-356-3296 
Cell: 520-247-0433 
Fax: 520-356-3803 
aveek@asarco.com 
 

From: Dawson, Tonisha <dawson.tonisha@epa.gov>  
Sent: Tuesday, March 31, 2020 10:59 AM 
To: Amy Veek <AVeek@asarco.com> 
Subject: RE: Asarco Hayden Smelter Modeling Inputs 
 
Could you explain what some of those issues may be? 
 
From: Amy Veek <AVeek@asarco.com>  
Sent: Tuesday, March 31, 2020 1:58 PM 
To: Dawson, Tonisha <dawson.tonisha@epa.gov> 
Subject: RE: Asarco Hayden Smelter Modeling Inputs 
 
Tonisha, 
 
There potentially could be issues with the new SSM requirements for various 
smelter equipment. I think this needs to be evaluated on a case-by-case basis. 
 
Amy Veek 
Environmental Manager 
ASARCO Hayden Operations 
Office: 520-356-3296 
Cell: 520-247-0433 
Fax: 520-356-3803 
aveek@asarco.com 
 
From: Dawson, Tonisha <dawson.tonisha@epa.gov>  
Sent: Monday, March 30, 2020 3:48 PM 
To: Amy Veek <AVeek@asarco.com> 
Subject: RE: Asarco Hayden Smelter Modeling Inputs 
 
Amy  
Are you aware of any issues that the facility may have with the new startup, 
shutdown and malfunction (SSM) requirements to be in compliance with 
standards at all times including startup and shutdown? 
Tonisha 
 
From: Amy Veek <AVeek@asarco.com>  
Sent: Friday, March 27, 2020 1:04 PM 
To: Dawson, Tonisha <dawson.tonisha@epa.gov> 
Cc: Rodolfo Rubio Castillo <rodolfo.rubio@asarco.com>; James Stewart 
<JaStewart@asarco.com>; Arturo Burgos <arturo.burgos@asarco.com> 
Subject: Asarco Hayden Smelter Modeling Inputs 
 

Hi Tonisha, 
 
The revised Asarco Hayden Smelter modeling inputs can be found in the 
attached spreadsheet in the tab titled “Hayden Smelter REV”. I have included the 
2019 actual emission values as we’ve completed this portion of the 2019 Air 
Emissions Inventory and believe 2019 would be the most representative year for 
the Hayden Smelter with its post retrofit configuration. Asarco is on standby to 
provide any additional information that EPA-OAQPS needs to perform the 
residual risk and technology reviews. Additionally, will EPA-OAQPS give Asarco 
a chance to comment on the residual risk and technology reviews, including the 
HEM-3 modeling, before EPA makes a proposal in the Federal Register? 
 
Best Regards, 
Amy Veek 
Environmental Manager 
ASARCO Hayden Operations 
Office: 520-356-3296 
Cell: 520-247-0433 
Fax: 520-356-3803 
aveek@asarco.com 
 
 

Furnace Feed
(Conc.+ Flux +
Byproducts)
Concentrate
Dryers (2)
Asarco Hayden Smelter
Simplified Flow Diagram
Stack Annulus
INCO Flash
Furnace
Converters(3)
Anode
Furnaces (3)
Copper Anodes
To Amarillo
Wet Gas
Cleaning
Venturi
Scrubber
Acid Plant
93% and 98%
Sulfuric Acid
2º Hood
Baghouse
Vent Gas
Baghouse
Process
Operation
Control
Device
Process Flow
Process Gas
Ventilation Gas
Blister
Copper
Slag Storage
or Recycle
Matte
Slag
Slag
Feed
SiO2
Flux
Anode
Baghouse
3º
Hoods
HSA Lime 
Stack Center
Stack Center
O2
Fugitive Emissions

ASARCO LLC’s Comments on “National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: 
Primary Copper Smelting Residual Risk and Technology Review and Primary 
Copper Smelting Area Source Technology Review,” 87 Fed. Reg. 1616 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
 
 
 
 
Attachment 3 
 
Record of Two Unsuccessful Attempts to Certify PM CEMS at Acid Plant Tail Gas 

¼V, ASARCO 
'ii. 
GRUPO MEXICO 
CERTIFIED MAIL: 7016 2070 0000 3574 9632 
RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED 
Chief, Environmental Enforcement Section 
Environment and Natural Resources Division 
U.S. Department of Justice 
Box 7611 Ben Franklin Station 
Washington, D.C. 20044-7611 
Re: DOJ No. 90-5-2-1-10459 
CERTIFIED MAIL: 7016 2070 0000 3574 9649 
RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED 
Director, Air Enforcement Division 
Office of Civil Enforcement 
U.S. EPA Headquarters, MC 2242A 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
CERTIFIED MAIL: 7016 2070 0000 3574 9656 
RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED 
Chief, Air and TRI Section 
Enforcement Division 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Region 9 
75 Hawthorne Street 
San Francisco, CA 94105 
August 28, 2018 
RE: Consent Decree No. CV-15-02206-PHX-DLR - Acid Plant PS11 Re-Test 
Report 
To whom it may concern: 
In accordance with the ASARCO LLC Consent Decree No. CV-15-02206-PHX­
DLR Paragraph 14.b ASARCO LLC (Asarco) is required to conduct a second 
round of PS11 correlation testing if the acid plant PM CEMS fails the initial PS11 
correlation testing. Asarco conducted the second round of PS11 correlation 
testing in accordance with the March 22, 2018 approved Re-Test Protocol and 
enclosed is the testing report for the PS11 re-test of the acid plant PM CEMS. 
Note that the acid plant PM CEM was not able to be successfully correlated 
following the PS11 re-test. 
866 North Hayden Avenue♦ P.O. Box 8 ♦ Hayden Arizona 85135 
Telephone: 520.356.7811 

Acid Plant PS 11 Re-Test Report - CV-15-02206-PHX-DLR - Asarco Hayden 
If there are any questions, please contact Amy Veek at (520) 356-3296. 
JAW/reg 
Enclosure 
pc: 
S. Gasser,
w/o enc. 
Amy Veek, 
w/enc. 
David Kim, ADEQ , 
<l::t!wi:! 
General Manager 
Hayden Operations 
F/RayEnvironmental/AIR/HaydenOps/2015AsarcoCD/PMCEMS/AcidPlantPS11 ReTestReportletter2018.doc 
Page 2 

March 29, 2018 
Joseph A. Wilhelm 
General Manager 
Hayden Operations 
ASARCO LLC 
PO Box 8 
Hayden, AZ 85135 
UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY 
REGION IX 
75 Hawthorne Street 
San Francisco, CA 94105 
Re: 
Consent Decree No. CV-15-2206-PHX-DLR-Revised Acid Plant Tail Gas PM 
CEMS Protocol 
Dear Mr. Wilhelm: 
The United States is in receipt of the revised particulate matter continuous emission 
monitoring system (PM CEMS) protocol for the acid plant tail gas submitted by ASARCO LLC 
(ASARCO) on March 22, 2018 (Revised Acid Plant Tail Gas PM CEMS Protocol). The Revised 
Acid Plant Tail Gas PM CEMS Protocol was submitted pursuant to Paragraph 14.b of the above­
referenced Consent Decree because the beta attenuation PM CEMS monitor failed to pass the 
initial certification test under EPA Performance Specification 11 (PS-11 ). See 40 C.F.R. Part 60, 
Appendix B. The initial PS-11 testing was conducted pursuant to Revision 1 of the Acid Plant 
Tail Gas PM CEMS protocol, which was approved by the EPA on March 8, 2017. 
By this letter, the EPA hereby notifies ASARCO that the Revised Acid Plant Tail Gas 
PM CEMS Protocol-as submitted on March 22, 2018-has been approved pursuant to 
Paragraph 31 of the above-captioned Consent Decree. 
Please contact Ryan Bickmore of the Office of Regional Counsel at 415-972-3058 or 
bickmore.rvan@epa.gov with any questions regarding this approval. 
Sincerely, 
t.
Manager, Air & TRI Section 
Enforcement Division 
EPA Region 9 -San Francisco 

cc (electronically): 
Paul Gutermann, Counsel for ASARCO LLC 
Amy Veek, ASARCO LLC 
James Beers, DOJ 
Mark Sims, EPA Region 9 
Ryan Bickmore, EPA Region 9 
Virginia Sorrell, EPA HQ

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0138 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
Via Regulations.gov 
 
April 26, 2022 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW 
Washington, DC  20460 
Re: 
A2C Comments on the Proposal Entitled “National Emission Standards for 
Hazardous Air Pollutants: Primary Copper Smelting Residual Risk and 
Technology Review and Primary Copper Smelting Area Source Technology 
Review” – Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
To Whom It May Concern: 
The Air Advocacy Coalition (“A2C”) appreciates the opportunity to submit the following 
comments on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA” or “Agency”) proposal 
entitled “National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Primary Copper Smelting 
Residual Risk and Technology Review and Primary Copper Smelting Area Source Technology 
Review,” published at 87 Fed. Reg. 1616 (Jan. 11, 2022) (“Proposal”).  The A2C is submitting 
these comments within the extended deadline of April 26, 2022.  87 Fed. Reg. 10325 (Feb. 24, 
2022). 
The A2C is an ad-hoc coalition that includes the American Chemistry Council, the 
American Coke and Coal Chemicals Institute, the American Fuel & Petrochemical 
Manufacturers, the American Iron and Steel Institute, the American Petroleum Institute, and the 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce.  The purpose of the A2C is to advocate for sensible and effective 
federal emissions standards under the Clean Air Act (“CAA”).  Companies represented by the 
members of the A2C own or operate primary copper smelters that will be subject to the 
forthcoming final rule.  A2C members also will be affected by the legal, regulatory, and policy 
precedents established by the final rule. 
The A2C has two comments on the Proposal.  These comments reinforce and amplify 
similar comments submitted individually by A2C members. 
1. 
EPA has not provided adequate justification for its proposed finding that risks due 
to HAP emissions from this source category are not acceptable. 
Based on the results of its risk assessment, EPA proposes to find that “the risks for this 
source category under the current MACT provisions are unacceptable.”  87 Fed. Reg. at 1642.  
EPA explains that its proposed finding “is largely based on the estimated exceedances of the lead 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
April 26, 2022 
Page 2 
 
 
NAAQS … along with the maximum acute HQ of 7 for arsenic, which indicate there are 
significant risks of noncancer health effects for people near the facility.”  Id.  EPA notes that 
“[a]lso contributing to this proposed determination, although to a lesser extent, are the inhalation 
cancer MIRs due to arsenic, with an estimated MIR of 80-in-1 million for actual emissions and 
90-in-1 million for allowable emissions, which are approaching the presumptive level of 
unacceptability of 100-in-1 million.”  Id. 
EPA’s proposed finding that risks are unacceptable is inadequately justified for several 
reasons.  First, the additional emissions control measures proposed to be adopted under CAA 
§ 112(d)(2), (3), or (6) should be factored into the risk assessment before drawing conclusions 
about risk acceptability.  The Agency predicts that “post-control analysis indicated that with the 
addition of controls proposed in this rulemaking, the cancer risks will be reduced from an 
estimated maximum individual excess cancer risk at Freeport from 80-in-1 million to 30-in-1 
million, and noncancer risks will also be reduced significantly, substantially reducing risk among 
highly exposed individuals.”  Id. at 1644.  Except for additional fugitive dust measures proposed 
to be needed to achieve an ample margin of safety (and which EPA predicts will achieve little or 
no actual emissions reductions because they already are mostly being implemented by the 
affected facilities), id., all of the proposed additional emissions control measures are separately 
justified under CAA § 112(d)(2), (3), or (6). 
This means that, as appropriate, these control measures will be finalized on their own 
merits (i.e., without regard to the outcome of EPA’s risk assessment) and necessarily will reduce 
risks associated with emissions from this source category.  As a result, these additional proposed 
control measures reasonably should be factored into EPA’s risk assessment before making 
conclusions about risk acceptability.  This is particularly true for proposed CAA §§ 112(d)(2) 
and (3) control measures, which are “MACT” emissions controls that are required to be 
considered in residual risk assessments.  See CAA § 112(f)(2)(A) (residual risk review must be 
conducted after promulgation of standards under CAA § 112(d)). 
Notably, EPA has routinely taken into account concurrently adopted technology-based 
standards in risk assessments in prior RTRs.  See, e.g., 80 Fed. Reg. 62390, 62399 (Oct. 15, 
2015) (EPA finding that risks from the primary aluminum production source category are 
acceptable based on a risk assessment that takes account of additional control measures adopted 
due to EPA’s concurrent technology review.).  EPA provides no explanation as to why the same 
approach should not be taken here. 
Second, the predicted lead NAAQS exceedance “is estimated to occur only in a small 
area near Freeport.”  Id. at 1642.  Based on actual emissions, EPA predicts that “a single census 
block (about five people) has the potential to be exposed to lead concentrations greater than the 
lead NAAQS.”  87 Fed. Reg. at 1638.  Moreover, lead emissions from the Freeport facility will 
be significantly reduced by existing emissions control obligations (consent decrees, state control 
measures) and by the technology-based emissions control measures proposed in this rule.  Thus, 
the predicted NAAQS exceedance would, in the first instance, be limited.  Indeed, the possibility 
of an exceedance will be effectively eliminated by the myriad additional emissions controls that 
will be implemented by the facility for reasons unrelated to the current risk assessment.  It is thus 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
April 26, 2022 
Page 3 
 
 
unreasonable for EPA to propose that the predicted lead NAAQS exceedances are a primary 
factor in its proposed finding that risks are unacceptable. 
Third, EPA’s proposal to give significant weight to the HQ of 7 attributable to arsenic 
emissions is inconsistent with findings in prior RTRs that such risk levels are acceptable.  For 
example, in the RTR for the primary aluminum production source category, EPA concluded that 
an HQ of 10 attributable to arsenic emissions represented an acceptable level of risk.  80 Fed. 
Reg. at 62399.  EPA provides no explanation in the Proposal as to why an HQ of 7 is a primary 
factor in proposing that risks are unacceptable when it previously concluded that an even higher 
HQ for the same HAP was not actionable.  This produces an arbitrary difference in outcomes. 
Fourth, EPA’s proposal that the cancer risks attributable to arsenic emissions are a factor 
supporting its proposed finding that risks are unacceptable is inconsistent with findings in prior 
RTRs that such risk levels are acceptable.  Based on allowable emissions, EPA’s risk assessment 
predicts a maximum individual cancer risk attributable to arsenic emissions from this source 
category to be 90 in-a-million, with 29,000 people predicted to have risks of greater than 1 in-a-
million and a cancer incidence of 0.003.  87 Fed. Reg. at 1637.  In contrast, in the RTR for 
primary aluminum production, EPA concluded that cancer risks due to arsenic emissions were 
acceptable.  The risk assessment in that rule predicted a maximum individual cancer risk of 70 
in-a-million, with 881,000 people predicted to have risks greater than 1 in-a-million and a cancer 
incidence of 0.06.  80 Fed. Reg. at 62398-9. 
So, the EPA predicts that the copper source category will have a slightly higher 
maximum cancer risk (90 vs. 70 in-a-million) but will have a significantly lower population 
exposed at levels above 1 in-a-million (well over an order of magnitude lower) and a 
significantly lower cancer incidence (again, well over an order of magnitude lower).  On balance, 
it is clear that the cancer risks attributable to arsenic emissions were substantially greater in the 
aluminum rule than in the current Proposal.  The relatively greater risks were deemed acceptable 
in the aluminum rule, yet contribute here to a proposed finding of unacceptability.  These 
disparate results are not explained in the Proposal and cause an arbitrary difference in outcome. 
2. 
Use of a revenue-based cost metric is unwarranted. 
In its consideration of costs in assessing “beyond the floor” (“BTF”) emissions standards, 
EPA uses the well-established metric of dollars per ton of pollutant removed.  However the 
Agency also asserts that it “also considers other factors in assessing the cost of the emission 
reduction as part of our BTF analysis, including, but not limited to, total capital costs, annual 
costs and costs compared to total revenues (e.g., costs to revenue ratios).”  87 Fed. Reg. at 1635.  
EPA estimates that the “annualized costs [of compliance with BTF standards] for Freeport are 
about 0.016 percent of the annual revenue of the facility’s ultimate parent company in 2019” and 
“[f]or the Asarco facility, the estimated annualized costs of the proposed rule (i.e., $95,000 in 
testing costs) were less than 0.01 percent of 2019 revenues for the facility’s ultimate parent 
company.”  Id. at 1651.  EPA concludes that these costs “are not economically significant.”  Id. 
at 1635. 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
April 26, 2022 
Page 4 
 
 
EPA’s consideration of a revenue-based cost metric is unwarranted.  To begin, EPA cites 
NRDC v. EPA, 749 F. 3d 1055, 1060 (D.C. Cir. 2013) for the proposition that “Section 112 does 
not command EPA to use a particular form of cost analysis.”  EPA misreads the court’s opinion, 
which stated: “According to EPA, Section 112 does not command EPA to use a particular form 
of cost analysis.”  Id. at 1060-1 (emphasis added).  The complete quote makes it clear that the 
court was describing EPA’s argument and not embracing that argument as its own.  Contrary to 
EPA’s assertion in the Proposal, the court did not hold as a matter of law that “cost effectiveness 
is but one factor [that EPA may consider] to assess cost” in setting BTF standards.  87 Fed. Reg. 
at 1635. 
Indeed, this part of the NRDC opinion addressed the petitioners’ argument that “EPA 
misinterpreted the statute to allow it to consider cost-effectiveness when setting beyond-the-floor 
standards.”  NRDC at 1060.  The court concluded that EPA’s use of cost effectiveness was 
“reasonable” and, therefore, “reject[ed] petitioners’ argument that EPA was required to exclude 
consideration of cost-effectiveness.”  Id. at 1061.  In other words, the court expressly upheld 
EPA’s use of the cost effectiveness metric.  The court does not opine on whether or how EPA 
may consider other possible cost metrics.  Thus, NRDC does not support EPA’s contention that it 
may use a revenue-based cost metric here. 
More generally, the suggested revenue-based cost metric is flawed because it would 
produce arbitrary and inconsistent results.  For example, revenue is only one part of the 
economic picture for companies that own or operate affected sources.  A company with 
significant revenue might be unprofitable, or even non-viable financially, if its expenditures 
equal or exceed its revenue.  In contrast, a company with relatively small revenue might be 
highly profitable if it has little overhead.  Thus, revenue alone says nothing about the ability of a 
company to accommodate the costs of emissions controls. 
Similarly, companies often comprise multiple different business units that derive revenue 
in different ways.  Hypothetically, a company operating an affected copper smelter might also 
have chemical manufacturing, paper making, and financial services operations.  It makes no 
sense to assess the acceptability of a beyond-the-floor standard for copper smelting based on the 
revenue that has nothing to do with copper smelting.  Acceptability would depend more on 
happenstance (i.e., the make up of companies owning affected sources) rather than the financial 
viability of the affected operations. 
Additionally, beyond-the-floor determinations are conducted on a standard-by-standard 
basis.  That creates the possibility that individual beyond-the-floor determinations might be 
deemed acceptable as compared with company revenue when, in the aggregate, the collection of 
beyond-the-floor standards would not be supportable. 
Lastly, for all but the biggest emission control expenditures, there will be a significant 
mismatch between the cost of emissions controls for a given beyond-the-floor standard and the 
overall revenues of companies with affected facilities.  That means that the cost of beyond-the-
floor measures almost always will appear small and favorable as compared to revenues.  Such 

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
April 26, 2022 
Page 5 
 
 
comparisons provide little insight because they dilute the value of the cost assessment to the 
point that cost would rarely be a reason to forego emissions control alternatives. 
*  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
Thank you again for the opportunity to submit these comments.  Please do not hesitate to 
contact me if you have questions or need more information. 
Sincerely, 
/s/ Keith Petka 
Keith Petka 
Senior Policy Manager 
American Petroleum Institute 
Chair – Air Advocacy Coalition

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0241 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
1
Hansen, Amanda
From:
gtsiolis@nj.rr.com
Sent:
Monday, February 26, 2024 3:37 PM
To:
French, Chuck; Hansen, Amanda
Cc:
'Alejandro Larrea'; 'Kevin McPeak'; 'Sam Reidhead'; 'James Stewart'
Subject:
Subpart QQQ RTR - Asarco's Response Following January 4, 2024 Virtual Meeting
Attachments:
2024-2-26p - Asarco's Letter to EPA OAQPS.pdf
 
Dear Chuck and Amanda, 
 
Attached please find Asarco’s response to your December 20, 2023 request for cost 
information relating to the three process-fugitive emissions-control projects that Asarco has 
proposed to EPA Region 9 in the context of the SO2 NAAQS NAA SIP proceeding and Pb 
NAAQS NAA SIP proceeding for the Hayden Area. 
 
The attached response also addresses the items we touched upon during our January 4, 
2024 virtual meeting. 
 
Please note, the FOIA request that is discussed in Section C of the response is being 
submitted separately to the National FOIA Office.  It is included as Attachment 5 of the 
response for your convenience. 
 
If you have any questions, please don’t hesitate to let me know. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
602-319-4021 
201-408-4256 
www.gtsiolis.com 
 
for ASARCO LLC 
 
 
Caution: This email originated from outside EPA, please exercise additional caution when deciding whether to open 
attachments or click on provided links.

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0097 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
Rio Tinto Kennecott Utah Copper, LLC. 4700 Daybreak Parkway, South Jordan, Utah 84009. 
. 
Rio Tinto Kennecott 
4700 Daybreak Parkway 
South Jordan, Utah 84009 
 
 
January 24, 2021 
 
Michael S. Regan 
Administrator, 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W. 
Washington, DC 20460 
Attention: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
 
Submitted through Regulations.gov: 
 
 
Re:  
30-day Comment Period Extension Request; NESHAP for Primary 
Copper Smelting Residual Risk and Primary Copper Smelting 
Area Source Technology Review 
 
Administrator Regan, 
 
On behalf of Kennecott Utah Copper LLC (“KUC”), I am writing to request a 30-day 
extension of the deadline to comment on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s 
(“EPA’s) proposed rule “National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Primary 
Copper Smelting Residual Risk and Technology Review and Primary Copper Smelting Area 
Source Technology Review”.1  Comments on the proposed rule, which would modify 40 
CFR part 63, subparts QQQ and EEEEEE, are currently due on February 25, 2020. 
KUC appreciates the EPA’s work to-date to review and revise subparts QQQ and EEEEEE 
as contemplated by the Clean Air Act. KUC is supportive of the EPA’s efforts and 
anticipates that the travel restrictions caused by the ongoing Covid-19 pandemic has only 
heightened the difficult task of completing the residual risk and technology review for these 
source categories. As one of just three copper smelters located in the United States – and 
the only source subject to subpart EEEEEE – a comprehensive and complete 
understanding of KUC’s operations and constraints is fundamental to the technology 
reviews that EPA has proposed. Indeed, KUC’s smelter implements flash smelting and flash 
converting technology so it’s Utah-based facility operates with lower emissions, as such the 
operations at the KUC smelter are not necessarily mirrored by the operations at the other 
smelters.  
KUC is reviewing the proposed rules and the technical information that EPA has prepared 
and placed in the rulemaking docket and intends to provide EPA with comments on the 
 
1 See Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430; 87 Fed. Reg. 1616, 1616/1 (Jan. 11, 2022).   

 
 
Page 2 of 2 
 
proposed revisions to subparts QQQ and EEEEEE. However, given the technical nature of 
the review, the extensive record that EPA has developed to-date, and limitations on staff 
availability given existing quarterly and annual reporting requirements as well as the 
planned full replacement of our Smelter continuous emissions monitoring systems in 
February 2022, KUC needs additional time to prepare comments on the proposed rules. For 
the reasons outlined in this letter, KUC requests a 30-day extension to the existing public 
comment period. 
Thank you for considering this request. Should you or EPA staff have any questions about 
this request, please contact Jenny Esker, KUC Principal Advisor, Air Quality, at (801) 569-
6494, or Jenny.Esker@riotinto.com.  
Regards, 
 
 
 
 
Cassady Kristensen 
Sr. Business Partner - Environment 
Kennecott Utah Copper

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0105 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
www.NTAATribalAir.org 
 
 
                                               National Tribal Air Association 
928.523.0526 office 
 
 
 
 
                                              P.O. Box 15004 
928.523.1266 fax  
 
 
 
 
                                Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5004  
 
 
Executive Committee 
Region 1 
Marvin Cling 
Passamaquoddy Tribe 
 
Region 2 
Angela Benedict 
IAQ Lead 
Saint Regis Mohawk Tribe 
 
Steven Smith 
Shinnecock Nation 
 
Region 4 
Scott Hansen 
Catawba Indian Nation 
 
Tiffany Lozada 
Poarch Band of Creek Indians 
 
Region 5 
Brandy Toft 
NTAA Vice-Chair 
Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe 
 
Region 6 
Craig Kreman 
NTAA Treasurer & 
Mobile Sources Lead 
Quapaw Nation 
 
Maxine Paul 
Pueblo of Santa Ana 
 
Region 7 
 
Billie Toledo 
NTAA Secretary 
Prairie Band Potawatomi 
Nation 
 
Kelly Shott 
Sac & Fox Tribe of the 
Mississippi in Iowa 
 
Region 8 
Randy Ashley 
Confederated Salish &  
Kootenai Tribes 
 
Janice Archuleta 
Ute Mountain Ute Tribe 
 
Region 9 
Syndi Smallwood 
NTAA Chairwoman 
Jamul Indian Village of 
California 
 
Leonard Bruce 
Gila River Indian Community 
 
Region 10 
Lucas Bair 
Wood Smoke Lead 
Spokane Tribe 
 
Alaska 
Rose Kalistook 
Alaska Air Lead 
Alaskan Village Chairman’s’ 
Association 
 
Shannon Issacs 
Craig Tribal Association  
  
February 25, 2022 
Tonisha Dawson  
Sector Policies and Programs Division (D243-02)  
Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27711 
 
National Tribal Air Association’s Comments on the U.S. EPA’s Proposed 
Primary Copper Smelter Residual Risk and Technology Review, Docket 
EPA-HQ-OA-2020-0430 
 
Dear Ms. Dawson: 
The National Tribal Air Association (NTAA) is pleased to submit this letter to 
provide comments on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) Proposed 
results of EPA’s Residual Risk and Technology Review (RTR) for the National 
Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP) for major source 
Primary Copper Smelters as required under the Clean Air Act (CAA) and the 
technology review for the Primary Copper Smelting area source NESHAP.   
The NTAA is a member-based organization with 154 principal member Tribes. 
The organization’s mission is to advance air quality management policies and 
programs, consistent with the needs, interests, and unique legal status of Indian 
Tribes. As such, the NTAA uses its resources to support the efforts of all federally 
recognized Tribes in protecting and improving the air quality within their 
respective jurisdictions. Although NTAA always seeks to represent consensus 
perspectives on any given issue, it is important to note that the views expressed by 
the NTAA may not be agreed upon by all Tribes. Further, it is also important to 
understand interactions with the organization does not substitute for government-
to government consultation, which can only be achieved through direct 
communications between the federal government and Indian Tribes. 
The NTAA agrees with the EPA’s proposal to determine the risk to be 
unacceptable, given the lead and arsenic emissions as well as the other HAP 
metals to the current regulations. The NTAA also agrees with the proposal for 
new standards for process fugitive emissions from anode refining roofline vents 
and work practices to minimize fugitive dust emissions, which will achieve 
acceptable risks and protect human health with an ample margin of safety.  
The NTAA is supportive of the proposal to establish emission standards for 
mercury emissions, separate of the PM standards that address emissions of other 
metal HAPs. Since mercury is emitted in the vapor stage, the NTAA agrees PM is 
not an appropriate surrogate for controls of mercury emissions.   

www.NTAATribalAir.org 
 
 
                                               National Tribal Air Association 
928.523.0526 office 
 
 
 
 
                                              P.O. Box 15004 
928.523.1266 fax  
 
 
 
 
                                Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5004  
 
 
The NTAA supports the proposal to include opacity limits for the Primary Copper smelters. It is 
appropriate to establish opacity limits (such as the opacity limits in the state air permits and CD) 
in the NESHAP in addition to the numeric PM MACT floor emissions limits. As EPA discussed 
in the proposal many of these opacity limits are already required in State permits, so there is no 
additional cost to the sources but by including opacity limits as part of the NESHAP, it 
establishes the national requirement as it provides a level-playing field across sources. 
Furthermore, as EPA discussed, these opacity limits provide for ongoing monitoring for upsets 
or other operational and compliance issues. The opacity limits should be in addition to the 
numeric PM MACT floor emissions limits as an additional layer of protection for the public.   
The NTAA believes that the EPA should establish direct lead limits, either in addition to, or 
instead of, the PM limit, because it is one of the risk drivers for this source category and would 
be appropriate to control for it directly.   
The NTAA is supportive of the ‘Beyond the Floor’ and ample margin of safety determinations 
for this source category, given the impacts of this source category on Native American and 
Hispanic populations. Providing protections beyond the floor will help reduce the risk to these 
disproportionately impacted populations.  
Specifically, the NTAA supports of this proposal: 
• BTF emissions limit for PM of 1.6 lbs/hr for anode refining process fugitive 
emissions at existing and new sources 
• Ample margin of safety determination the proposal to require facilities to develop and 
implement a robust fugitive dust plan, requiring, at a minimum, the specific work 
practices but also could include other practices identified by the facilities. 
Finally, the NTAA is disappointed with the apparent lack of attention to the impacts on the 
Tribes that are located near the two major sources; this includes the San Carlos Apache Tribe.  
The language you use in addressing EO 13175.   
This action does not have Tribal implications as specified in Executive Order 13175. 
Thus, Executive Order 13175 does not apply to this action. However, consistent with 
the EPA policy on coordination and consultation with Indian Tribes, the EPA will offer 
government-to-government consultation with Tribes as requested.  
We recognize that these sources are not on the reservations; however, and thus, the Tribe does 
not have jurisdiction over these sources, so under the terms of the EO by itself there are not 
“implications”.  However, the Agency’s should act on its own Indian Policy and the Tribal 
Treaty Rights policy in determining if consultation is required. It is disingenuous given the 
proximity to the reservation and its impact on nearby Tribal populations, the environment, and 
potential treaty right to not have proactively reached out and offered consultation to the impacted 
Tribes in Hayden and surrounding Gila Counties.   
The NTAA appreciates this opportunity to submit this pre-proposal comment and looks forward 
to further work with the EPA on this important issue. If you have any questions or seek 

www.NTAATribalAir.org 
 
 
                                               National Tribal Air Association 
928.523.0526 office 
 
 
 
 
                                              P.O. Box 15004 
928.523.1266 fax  
 
 
 
 
                                Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5004  
 
 
clarification from the NTAA, please do not hesitate to contact please do not hesitate to contact 
the NTAA’s Project Director, Andy Bessler at (928)523-0526 or email Andy.Bessler@nau.edu.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On Behalf of the NTAA Executive Committee, 
 
 
Syndi Smallwood 
NTAA Chairwoman 
National Tribal Air Association’s 
Executive Committee 
 
 
Cc: Pat Childers, EPA OAR

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0098 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
Douglas A. Ducey 
Governor 
 
Misael Cabrera 
Director 
 
Phoenix Office 
1110 W. Washington St. | Phoenix, AZ 85007 
602-771-2300 
azdeq.gov 
Southern Regional Office 
400 W. Congress St. | Suite 433 | Tucson, AZ 85701 
520-628-6733 
Submitted online via https://www.regulations.gov 
 
February 16, 2022 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re:  
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Primary Copper Smelting  
Residual Risk and Technology Review and Primary Copper Smelting Area Source 
Technology Review (87 FR 1,616) 
 
To whom it may concern: 
 
The Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) appreciates the opportunity to 
comment on the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed National Emissions 
Standard for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP) for primary copper smelting published in the 
Federal Register on January 11, 2022.  
 
EPA’s proposed rule established a deadline of February 25, 2022 for public comment.  ADEQ is 
requesting that EPA extend the comment period because: 1) the proposal is technically complex 
and will have a substantial impact on the copper smelters in Arizona; 2) the rule language was 
not made available until February 2, 2022; and 3) Executive Orders 12866 and 13563 suggest 
that a comment period should, at a minimum, provide for 60 days.   Therefore, ADEQ requests 
that EPA extend the public comment period by at least 30 days and notify the public of the 
extension as soon as possible and well in advance of the February 25 deadline so commenters 
may make full use of the additional time. 
 
First, EPA’s proposal is technically complex and has substantial economic impacts for the two 
copper smelters in Arizona.  Additionally, EPA’s proposed test and compliance methodology 
requires extensive evaluation for how ADEQ would implement this proposed rule.  ADEQ’s 
evaluation of the proposed rule is still on-going at this time. 
 
Second, the docket originally contained a document as “Proposed Regulation Edits for 40 CFR 
Part 63, Subpart QQQ” (Document 64).0F1  On February 1, 2022 (21 days after the opening of this 
docket), Document 90, an updated version of the proposed regulatory edits, was uploaded to the 
                                                 
1 86 FR 1,616, 1,619 (Jan. 11, 2022). 

Page 2 of 2 
 
docket.  Document 90 appears to have significant changes from the version in Document 64. 
These different versions necessitated additional review time to understand the full scope of 
EPA’s proposal.  Therefore, ADEQ requests EPA extend the comment period to allow additional 
time to review the proposed language of the regulations.  
 
Third, Executive Orders 12866 and 13563 suggest in most instances, a comment period should 
provide for a minimum of 60 days.  Executive Order 12866 provides that “. . .each agency 
should afford the public a meaningful opportunity to comment on any proposed regulation, 
which in most cases should include a comment period of not less than 60 days.”  Executive 
Order 13563 likewise directs agencies to “...afford the public a meaningful opportunity to 
comment through the Internet on any proposed regulation, with a comment period that should 
generally be at least 60 days.” These Executive Orders establish a general rule of providing a 
minimum of 60 days for public comment. The technically and legally complex issues the NPRM 
addresses illustrate why a minimum of 60 days must be allowed for the public to file comments 
in response to the rule. EPA’s proposed rule does not provide a justification for providing only 
45 days for public comment.   
 
ADEQ appreciates EPA’s need to have adequate time to consider public comments, conduct any 
additional analyses, develop the final rule package, and complete necessary agency and 
interagency review.  Additionally, ADEQ recognizes that EPA is operating under a court ordered 
deadline to complete this rulemaking.   However, these needs should also be balanced against the 
public's interest to have adequate time to consider and respond to EPA’s complex proposal.  
ADEQ is of the opinion that 45 days is an insufficient amount of time, especially given the 
complexity of these issues, and delays in providing the current version of the proposed 
regulatory text. 
 
If you have any questions, please contact Joseph Martini, Air Quality Improvement Planning 
Section, Air Quality Division, at 602-771-1089 or martini.joseph@azdeq.gov.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of ADEQ’s comments. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Daniel Czecholinski 
Air Quality Division Director

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0106 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
1
Perez, JuanB
From:
Mariah Tanay Ashley <Mariah.Ashley@nau.edu>
Sent:
Friday, February 25, 2022 5:59 PM
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET
Cc:
andy.bessler@nau.edu; lucas.bair@spokanetribe.com; lweeks@nemont.net; randall.ashley@cskt.org; 
billietoledo@pbpnation.org; Craig Kreman; Brandy Toft; scott.hansen@catawbaindian.net; Angela 
Benedict; Steven Smith; marvin@wabanaki.com; maxine.paul@santaana-nsn.gov; 
jarchuleta@utemountain.org; kelly.schott@meskwaki-nsn.gov; Leonard Bruce; ssmallwood@jiv-
nsn.gov; Shannon Isaacs; Rkalistook@avcp.org; calebminthorn
Subject:
Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430
Attachments:
NTAA Comment Letter on EPA RTR for Copper-Smelters Feb-25-2022.pdf
To Whom It May Concern, 
 
Please see the attached document for the corrected NTAA Comment Letter, Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-
0430 on the U.S. EPA’s Proposed Primary Copper Smelter Residual Risk and Technology Review. 
 
Thank you, 
 
Mariah Ashley, Diné  
Community Coordinator, National Tribal Air Association 
Institute for Tribal Environmental Professionals (ITEP) 
Northern Arizona University  
E: Mariah.Ashley@nau.edu   
She/her (Why do pronouns matter?)

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0101 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
1
Perez, JuanB
From:
gtsiolis@nj.rr.com
Sent:
Tuesday, February 22, 2022 9:26 AM
To:
A-AND-R-DOCKET; Dawson, Tonisha; French, Chuck
Cc:
'James Stewart'; 'Gary Crane'; 'Eddie Al-Rayes'; 'Matt Russell'
Subject:
RE: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 - REQUEST FOR 30-DAYS EXTENSION OF COMMENT 
PERIOD
Folks, 
 
The regulations.gov website has been down for the last couple of days, making it impossible 
to search EPA’s NESHAPs-rulemaking dockets for information relevant to the above-
referenced rulemaking. 
 
This is another reason why EPA should extend the comment period applicable to the 
rulemaking. 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
602-319-4021 
201-408-4256  
 
for ASARCO LLC 
 
From: gtsiolis@nj.rr.com <gtsiolis@nj.rr.com>  
Sent: Thursday, February 10, 2022 8:40 AM 
To: 'a-and-r-docket@epa.gov' <a-and-r-docket@epa.gov>; 'dawson.tonisha@epa.gov' 
<dawson.tonisha@epa.gov>; 'french.chuck@epa.gov' <french.chuck@epa.gov> 
Cc: 'James Stewart' <JaStewart@asarco.com>; 'Gary Crane' <gary.crane@asarco.com>; 
'Eddie Al-Rayes' <ealrayes@trinityconsultants.com>; 'Matt Russell' <russell@gcteng.com> 
Subject: Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 - REQUEST FOR 30-DAYS EXTENSION 
OF COMMENT PERIOD 
 
Attached please find ASARCO LLC’s request for a 30-days extension of the comment period 
in the above-reference rulemaking. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
George A. Tsiolis 
Attorney at Law 
602-319-4021 
201-408-4256  
 
for ASARCO LLC

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0136 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
Douglas A. Ducey 
Governor 
Misael Cabrera 
Director 
Phoenix Office 
1110 W. Washington St. • Phoenix, AZ 85007 
602-771-2300 
azdeq.gov 
Southern Regional Office 
400 W. Congress St. • Suite 433 • Tucson, AZ 85701 
520-628-6733 
  
 
Submitted online via https://www.regulations.gov/ 
 
April 26, 2022 
 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPA Docket Center 
Docket ID Number: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 
Mail Code 28221T 
1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW  
Washington, DC 20460 
 
Re:  
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Primary Copper Smelting  
Residual Risk and Technology Review and Primary Copper Smelting Area Source Technology 
Review (87 FR 1,616) 
 
To whom it may concern: 
 
The Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (ADEQ) appreciates the opportunity to comment on 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) proposed National Emissions Standard for Hazardous 
Air Pollutants (NESHAP) for primary copper smelting published in the Federal Register on January 11, 
2022.  Additionally, ADEQ appreciates EPA’s decision to expand the comment period. 
 
Under Arizona Revised Statutes (A.R.S) § 49-402(A)(2), ADEQ has original jurisdiction over the copper 
smelters located in Arizona, and therefore is the permitting authority for these two sources.  
Additionally, ADEQ has responsibility for compliance and enforcement. 
 
ADEQ has two concerns regarding two aspects of the proposed rule: 1) demonstrating compliance with 
the roofline limits might be practically impossible as EPA’s proposed methodology cannot be 
implemented at either the Miami, AZ or Hayden, AZ smelters; 2) EPA’s roofline limits were derived from 
data that was not collected using an EPA test method or using a reference monitor.  In addition to those 
concerns, ADEQ supports EPA’s decision to not include an opacity limit in the proposed rule. 
 
 
 
 

Page 2 of 6 
 
I. 
EPA’s proposed performance test method cannot be implemented at the smelters. 
A. EPA’s proposed rule requires isokinetic sampling, which is not possible at either 
smelter. 
 
ADEQ is concerned that EPA’s proposed rule presents difficulties demonstrating compliance with EPA’s 
proposed compliance testing methods for the copper smelters located in Miami, AZ and Hayden, AZ.   
Specifically, EPA’s proposed rule is based on Method 1 for selecting sample port locations.1  As will be 
discussed below, ADEQ believes that there are no locations along either  facilities’ rooflines that meet 
requirements of Method 1.  Therefore, ADEQ requests that EPA reconsider its compliance testing 
requirements in the proposed rule to permit alternatives that do not require isokinetic sampling. 
 
EPA’s proposed rule establishes three limits on emissions from existing facilities’ roofline: 
● 
For converter operations, EPA is proposing a PM emission limit of 1.7 lbs/hr for process 
fugitive roof vents.2 
● 
For smelting furnaces, EPA is proposing a PM emissions limit of 4.3 lbs/hr for process 
fugitive roof vents.3 
● 
For anode refining operations, EPA is proposing a limit of 1.6 lbs/hr for process roof 
vents.4 
 
EPA’s proposed rule establishes a fugitive emission limit from the smelter roofline vents.5 In order to 
demonstrate compliance with the roof vent filterable particulate matter emission limits in the proposed 
40 CFR § 63.1444, the facility must conduct a performance test to determine compliance with the limit.6  
40 CFR §§ 63.1450(e)-(f) establishes the performance test to determine compliance with the proposed 
40 CFR § 63.1444.  Both proposed §§ 63.1450(e)(1)(i) and 63.1450(f)(1)(i) require the use of Method 1 to 
select sampling port locations and number of traverse points. 
 
ADEQ is concerned that there are physical limitations for both facilities that prevent the use of Method 
1.  This section discusses these concerns for the smelter in Miami, AZ and then the smelter in Hayden, 
AZ.  As described in a technical report on test method roofline lead emissions, operational influences 
during testing, and effect on smelter reconfiguration, prepared by Trinity Consultants and Hatch for the 
FMI Miami smelter (Document 62), there are no locations that meet Method 1’s requirements.7  
 
                                                 
1 Regulations.gov, Proposed Regulation Edits for 40 CFR Part 63, Subpart QQQ: Primary Copper Smelting NESHAP Risk and Technology Review 
Proposal, Regulatory text with proposed edits in redline/strikeout, available at https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-
0430-0090 (Document 90) (proposed 40 CFR §§ 63.1450(e)-(f)). 
2 87 FR 1,616, 1,635 (Jan. 11, 2022). 
3 Id.  
4 Id. 
5 Supra note 1 at 40 CFR §§ 63.1444(b)(2)(iii), (d)(7). 
6 Supra note 1 at 40 CFR §§ 63.1450(e)-(f). 
7 Regulations.gov, Freeport-McMoRan Miami, Inc. - Consent Order Docket No. A-10-18 Response to Items III.C and III.D, available at 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0062 (Document 62). 

Page 3 of 6 
The Miami smelter’s Air Quality Permit, issued by ADEQ, requires annual roofline fugitive testing for PM, 
PM10, PM2.5, and Pb, as well as a roofline monitoring system for SO2.8  In order to meet the PM testing 
requirement for the ADEQ permit, FMI Miami conducted a feasibility study on different test methods at 
the roofline.9  This report examined several test methods (Methods 1, 14, 5 and 29, 201A and 202, 5D 
and 29).10   
 
This report discussed the difficulties of implementing Method 1, which involves the placement of a 
sample probe into the exhaust stream where sampling is obtained isokinetically.11  This report 
concluded that the roofline vents at the Miami smelter cannot meet the minimum methods of Method 
1, including either the simplified (section 1.2) procedure or alternative procedure (11.5).12  
 
If Method 1 cannot be utilized effectively at the two facilities subject to the major source rule, ADEQ is 
concerned the rule is not practical to implement or enforce. 
 
B. Test methods that rely on Method 1  
 
This section discusses the impacts of the facilities  rooflines on EPA’s proposed methodology.  As part of 
its compliance testing methodology, the proposed rule requires the use of additional test methods.13  
These methods rely on sampling obtained via Method 1.   
However, regarding the Miami smelter, Document 62 examined several of these methods.  For example, 
Document 62 EPA Method 5D found that the application of this test method for fugitive emissions at the 
roofline is problematic, as the FMI Miami roofline does not meet the criteria of Method 1.14   EPA 
Method 5D requires isokinetic sampling that is designed to sample numerous sample points (twenty-
four or greater) across the entirety of a positive pressure fabric filter outlet, which meets EPA Method 1 
criteria for isokinetic sampling.  However, as described above, since the roofline does not meet Method 
1, ADEQ believes that the Miami smelter will not be able to meet this requirement.  This same issue 
appears to be the same for EPA’s proposed use of Oregon 8.15 
Additionally, EPA Method 29 for lead emissions needs a separate sample system essentially doubling the 
number of samples to be collected under isokinetic conditions. Because quality assurance objectives for 
representativeness require isokinetic conditions; this is not a feasible method for sampling rooflines, as 
isokinetic conditions are not possible. 
                                                 
8 Id. 
9 Id. 
10 Id. at 10 - 13. 
11 Id.; see also 40 CFR Part 60, Appendix A, Method 1. 
12 See supra note 7. 
13 Supra note 1 at 40 § CFR 63.1450(e)(1)(ii)-(iv), (f)(1)(ii)-(iv). 
14 Id. 
15 Supra note 1 at 40 CFR § 63.1450(e)(1)(v), (f)(1)(v). 

Page 4 of 6 
Further, determination of gas flow angles in the roofline vents is impractical due to variability in the 
smelting operations and ambient wind conditions.16 For example, during wind gusts, the air pressure on 
one side of the roofline may be greater than the air pressure under the roofline causing additional air to 
flow into the roofline from above.  In contrast, on the opposite side  of the roofline, the reverse effect 
could occur and causing air to flow out of the roofline. Because wind gusts  affect both the flow rate and 
direction at the roofline vents, obtaining accurate gas flow traversing angles requires consistently calm 
wind conditions, which is not likely to occur outside of a controlled laboratory environment. To 
compensate for the variability in wind conditions, , the sampling protocol would require constant 
instantaneous adjustments to the sample probes (during test runs of 12 hours or more) to meet the 
isokinetic test requirements in EPA Method 5.17 Such instantaneous adjustments may not be practicable 
to implement during sampling .  
Also, Method 5 sampling protocol incorporates a requirement for adequate sample locations to account 
for variations in the flows along the roofline.  This necessitates a large number of sampling staff to be 
located in a dangerous, high temperature environment for extended periods of 12 hours or more.18 
Temperatures at the roofline can reach 140°F and poses a significant safety concern for the testing 
personnel. 
After assessing several other test methods, the study conducted by FMI Miami concluded that using 
MiniVol portable air samplers, manufactured by Airmetrics, is the most representative sampling method 
for the roofline emissions application.19 The MiniVol is not a Federal Reference Method (FRM) sampler, 
but provides results that closely approximate data from FRM samplers to obtain representative 
concentrations of particulate matter without the need for isokinetic sampling . Airmetrics, in 
conjunction with the EPA, developed the patented low-flow technology found in the MiniVol to address 
the need for portable air sampling.20 The portable air samplers can be run concurrently at several 
locations along the roofline.  This approach offers several benefits:  (1)  fluctuations in flows and 
emissions along the roofline are better managed, (2) Sampling is  not dependent on linear air flow, so 
constant adjustments are not required, and  (3) Sampling can occur for for longer periods of time, which 
provides a  more representative sample of the process operations occurring in the smelter buildings.  
Use of this sampling protocol will require the collection of velocity and temperature measurements 
using the existing roofline monitoring system equipment. As an added benefit, the portable air samplers 
also are capable of speciating samples of PM, PM10, and PM2.5.21  
During required annual compliance testing, the Miami smelter concurrently utilizes 5 samplers at the 
Anode Building roofline, 3 samplers at the IsaSmelt Furnace Building roofline, 2 samplers at the 
Converter Building roofline, and 2 samplers at the Electric Furnace Building roofline. 22 
                                                 
16 See supra note 7. 
17 Id. 
18 Supra note 1 at 40 CFR § 63.1450(e)(2), (f)(2). 
19 Supra note 7 at 32. 
20 Id. 
21 AIRMETRICS, MINIVOL PORTABLE AIR SAMPLER, OPERATION MANUAL, 1-2 (2006), at http://www.airmetrics.com/downloads/Manual_V42d.pdf. 
22 Supra note 7 at Appendix C, at 3. 

Page 5 of 6 
Similarly, the roofline vents at the Asarco copper smelter located in Hayden, AZ do not meet the 
requirements of Method 1 to obtain samples isokinetically. Asarco utilized MiniVol samplers during its 
Fugitive Emissions Study as part of the 2015 consent decree with EPA.   
Considering the test methods that rely on Method 1, ADEQ is concerned about the feasibility of 
requiring Method 1 for roofline compliance testing.  
C. A standard based on  data from  MiniVol samplers should reflect the practical 
challenges meeting Method 1. 
In a related point, ADEQ is concerned that the proposed roofline lead limit is based on data collected 
using samplers that are not designated as a Federal Reference Method (FRM). Use of non-FRM sampler 
data could create a standard that is not achievable, if tested using a FRM.  It is unclear from EPA’s 
proposed rule how to address a potential discrepancy between a standard based on non-FRM and 
testing using a FRM.  
As discussed above, the roofline PM data from the FMI Miami facility was obtained from MiniVol 
samplers.23 As described in Document 62, FMI utilized MiniVol samplers in May/June 2018 at the Miami 
Smelter.  It appears that this data was utilized by EPA to develop its roofline emissions limits.24   EPA 
used the MiniVol data for its proposed PM roofline limit.25 However, as discussed above, this data was 
collected using a method other than Method 5 due to the issues surrounding the FMI Miami facility 
roofline.  Therefore, EPA’s rule is based on data that does not meet its own methodology.   
EPA’s proposed PM limit was established using data that was collected using a method other than 
Method 5.26  As the permitting agency, ADEQ has three concerns with EPA’s rule: First, it is not clear 
from EPA’s rule that a Method 5 test conducted at the same time would have produced the same result 
as the alternative method used to obtain the data the rule is based on. Second, it is unknown whether 
this standard is achievable, as determined by the proposed test methodology. Third, as described above, 
neither rooflines meet Method 1 and there are no locations to obtain samples under this method. 
As there are only two existing copper smelters that are major sources of HAPs in the United States, 
ADEQ believes that the rule should provide for an effective method of implementation at both facilities.  
As currently structured, the rule does not do so.  This concern could potentially be addressed by 
reconsidering the proposed requirements for roofline compliance testing. 
III. ADEQ supports EPA’s decision to not set an opacity limit. 
In its proposal, EPA solicited comments on whether to set an opacity limit in the NESHAPs rule.27  As 
discussed in EPA’s April 5, 2021 memorandum entitled “Opacity Standards for Major Primary Copper 
Smelting Facilities,” EPA decided not to propose opacity limits due to variability in opacity limits in air 
                                                 
23 Regulations.gov, Memorandum: MACT Floor Analysis for the Primary Copper Smelting Source Category (Nov. 27, 2020), Section 3 available at 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0055 (Document 55) (“The data collected for the fugitive roofline vents was 
not collected using an EPA method or using reference monitors.”). 
24 Id.  
25 See supra note 22, 3. 
26 Id. 
27 86 FR 1,616, 1,634 (Jan. 11, 2022). 

Page 6 of 6 
permits and the consent decree for Asarco.28  ADEQ agrees with EPA’s decision to not propose an 
opacity limit, as it is not clear that an opacity standard represents either the maximum achievable 
control technology (MACT) floor or beyond-the-floor (BTF) standard.  ADEQ believes that the limits 
established by existing operating permits, or consent decree, are sufficient.   
IV. Conclusion. 
This issue is one of concern for ADEQ, as the department has original jurisdiction for sources that pertain 
to the smelting of metal ore.29 ADEQ will be involved in the issuance of any title V permits, and 
compliance with these permits for the two copper smelters in Arizona.   Therefore, ADEQ requests EPA 
reconsider its rule to address these concerns. 
If you have any questions, please contact Joseph Martini, Air Quality Improvement Planning Section, Air 
Quality Division, at 602-771-1089 or martini.joseph@azdeq.gov.  
 
Thank you for your consideration of ADEQ’s comments. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Daniel Czecholinski 
Air Quality Division Director 
 
                                                 
28  Regulations.gov, Opacity Standards for Major Primary Copper Smelting Facilities (Apr. 5, 2021), available at 
https://www.regulations.gov/document/EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0057. 
29 A.R.S. § 49-402(A)(2).

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0103 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
www.NTAATribalAir.org 
 
 
                                               National Tribal Air Association 
928.523.0526 office 
 
 
 
 
                                              P.O. Box 15004 
928.523.1266 fax  
 
 
 
 
                                Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5004  
 
 
Executive Committee 
Region 1 
Marvin Cling 
Passamaquoddy Tribe 
 
Region 2 
Angela Benedict 
IAQ Lead 
Saint Regis Mohawk Tribe 
 
Steven Smith 
Shinnecock Nation 
 
Region 4 
Scott Hansen 
Catawba Indian Nation 
 
Tiffany Lozada 
Poarch Band of Creek Indians 
 
Region 5 
Brandy Toft 
NTAA Vice-Chair 
Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe 
 
Region 6 
Craig Kreman 
NTAA Treasurer & 
Mobile Sources Lead 
Quapaw Nation 
 
Maxine Paul 
Pueblo of Santa Ana 
 
Region 7 
 
Billie Toledo 
NTAA Secretary 
Prairie Band Potawatomi 
Nation 
 
Kelly Shott 
Sac & Fox Tribe of the 
Mississippi in Iowa 
 
Region 8 
Randy Ashley 
Confederated Salish &  
Kootenai Tribes 
 
Janice Archuleta 
Ute Mountain Ute Tribe 
 
Region 9 
Syndi Smallwood 
NTAA Chairwoman 
Jamul Indian Village of 
California 
 
Leonard Bruce 
Gila River Indian Community 
 
Region 10 
Lucas Bair 
Wood Smoke Lead 
Spokane Tribe 
 
Alaska 
Rose Kalistook 
Alaska Air Lead 
Alaskan Village Chairman’s’ 
Association 
 
Shannon Issacs 
Craig Tribal Association  
  
February 25, 2022 
Tonisha Dawson  
Sector Policies and Programs Division (D243-02)  
Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards 
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27711 
 
National Tribal Air Association’s Comments on the U.S. EPA’s Proposed 
Primary Copper Smelter Residual Risk and Technology Review, Docket 
EPA-HQ-OA-2020-0430 
 
Dear Ms. Dawson: 
The National Tribal Air Association (NTAA) is pleased to submit this letter to 
provide comments on the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA’s) Proposed 
results of EPA’s Residual Risk and Technology Review (RTR) for the National 
Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAP) for major source 
Primary Copper Smelters as required under the Clean Air Act (CAA) and the 
technology review for the Primary Copper Smelting area source NESHAP.   
The NTAA is a member-based organization with 154 principal member Tribes. 
The organization’s mission is to advance air quality management policies and 
programs, consistent with the needs, interests, and unique legal status of Indian 
Tribes. As such, the NTAA uses its resources to support the efforts of all federally 
recognized Tribes in protecting and improving the air quality within their 
respective jurisdictions. Although NTAA always seeks to represent consensus 
perspectives on any given issue, it is important to note that the views expressed by 
the NTAA may not be agreed upon by all Tribes. Further, it is also important to 
understand interactions with the organization does not substitute for government-
to government consultation, which can only be achieved through direct 
communications between the federal government and Indian Tribes. 
The NTAA agrees with the EPA’s proposal to determine the risk to be 
unacceptable, given the lead and arsenic emissions as well as the other HAP 
metals to the current regulations. The NTAA also agrees with the proposal for 
new standards for process fugitive emissions from anode refining roofline vents 
and work practices to minimize fugitive dust emissions, which will achieve 
acceptable risks and protect human health with an ample margin of safety.  
The NTAA is supportive of the proposal to establish emission standards for 
mercury emissions, separate of the PM standards that address emissions of other 
metal HAPs. Since mercury is emitted in the vapor stage, the NTAA agrees PM is 
not an appropriate surrogate for controls of mercury emissions.   

www.NTAATribalAir.org 
 
 
                                               National Tribal Air Association 
928.523.0526 office 
 
 
 
 
                                              P.O. Box 15004 
928.523.1266 fax  
 
 
 
 
                                Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5004  
 
 
The NTAA supports the proposal to include opacity limits for the Primary Copper smelters. It is 
appropriate to establish opacity limits (such as the opacity limits in the state air permits and CD) 
in the NESHAP in addition to the numeric PM MACT floor emissions limits. As EPA discussed 
in the proposal many of these opacity limits are already required in State permits, so there is no 
additional cost to the sources but by including opacity limits as part of the NESHAP, it 
establishes the national requirement as it provides a level-playing field across sources. 
Furthermore, as EPA discussed, these opacity limits provide for ongoing monitoring for upsets 
or other operational and compliance issues. The opacity limits should be in addition to the 
numeric PM MACT floor emissions limits as an additional layer of protection for the public.   
The NTAA believes that the EPA should establish direct lead limits, either in addition to, or 
instead of, the PM limit, because it is one of the risk drivers for this source category and would 
be appropriate to control for it directly.   
The NTAA is supportive of the ‘Beyond the Floor’ and ample margin of safety determinations 
for this source category, given the impacts of this source category on Native American and 
Hispanic populations. Providing protections beyond the floor will help reduce the risk to these 
disproportionately impacted populations.  
Specifically, the NTAA supports of this proposal: 
• BTF emissions limit for PM of 1.6 lbs/hr for anode refining process fugitive 
emissions at existing and new sources 
• Ample margin of safety determination the proposal to require facilities to develop and 
implement a robust fugitive dust plan, requiring, at a minimum, the specific work 
practices but also could include other practices identified by the facilities. 
Finally, the NTAA is disappointed with the apparent lack of attention to the impacts on the 
Tribes that are located near the two major sources; this includes the San Carlos Apache Tribe.  
The language you use in addressing EO 13175.   
This action does not have Tribal implications as specified in Executive Order 13175. 
Thus, Executive Order 13175 does not apply to this action. However, consistent with 
the EPA policy on coordination and consultation with Indian Tribes, the EPA will offer 
government-to-government consultation with Tribes as requested.  
We recognize that these sources are not on the reservations; however, and thus, the Tribe does 
not have jurisdiction over these sources, so under the terms of the EO by itself there are not 
“implications”.  However, the Agency’s should act on its own Indian Policy and the Tribal 
Treaty Rights policy in determining if consultation is required. It is disingenuous given the 
proximity to the reservation and its impact on nearby Tribal populations, the environment, and 
potential treaty right to not have proactively reached out and offered consultation to the impacted 
Tribes in Hayden and surrounding Gila Counties.   
The NTAA appreciates this opportunity to submit this pre-proposal comment and looks forward 
to further work with the EPA on this important issue. If you have any questions or seek 

www.NTAATribalAir.org 
 
 
                                               National Tribal Air Association 
928.523.0526 office 
 
 
 
 
                                              P.O. Box 15004 
928.523.1266 fax  
 
 
 
 
                                Flagstaff, AZ 86011-5004  
 
 
clarification from the NTAA, please do not hesitate to contact please do not hesitate to contact 
the NTAA’s Project Director, Andy Bessler at (928)523-0526 or email Andy.Bessler@nau.edu.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On Behalf of the NTAA Executive Committee, 
 
 
Syndi Smallwood 
NTAA Chairwoman 
National Tribal Air Association’s 
Executive Committee 
 
 
Cc: Pat Childers, EPA OAR

--- COMMENT ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0134 AND DOCKET ID: EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430 ---
= FREEPORT-McMoRAN 
Miami Operations 
5701 New St, PO Box 4444, Claypool, AZ 85532-4444 
April 26, 2022 
VIA ELECTRONIC SUBMISSION 
The Honorable Michael S. Regan 
Administrator 
Environmental Protection Agency 
Washington, D.C. 20460 
Re: | Comments by Freeport-McMoRan Miami Inc. on the Proposed Primary Copper Smelting 
NESHAP Rule Revisions (Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430) 
Dear Administrator Regan: 
Freeport-McMoRan Miami Inc. (“Freeport” or “FMMI”) currently owns and operates a 
copper smelter located in Miami, Gila County, Arizona (the “Miami Smelter’). The Miami Smelter 
is one of only two sources regulated under the Environmental Protection Agency’s (“EPA”) 
National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (“NESHAP”) for Primary Copper 
Smelting, 40 CFR part 63, subpart QQQ (the “proposed NESHAP revisions”). The proposed 
NESHAP revisions will substantially change the air emission limitations applicable to the Miami 
Smelter as well 
as how the facility must demonstrate compliance with the rule limitations. 
Complying with these proposed changes would impose substantial additional capital and operating 
costs on FMMI. 
FMML isa subsidiary of Freeport-McMoRan Inc. (FCX), one of the world's largest publicly 
traded copper producers. The FCX portfolio of assets includes the Grasberg minerals district in 
Indonesia, one of the world's largest copper and gold deposits; and significant mining operations 
in North America and South America, including the large-scale Morenci minerals district in 
Arizona and the Cerro Verde operation in Peru. Freeport has a long history of robust sustainability 
programs and reporting. In 2021, FCX issued its 20th Annual Sustainability Report and its second 
annual Climate Report. Since 2005, FCX has reported 
its sustainability performance under 
standards of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) and now also reports on its performance in 
alignment with standards of the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB). Freeport is 
also 
committed 
to 
aligning 
its 
strategy 
and 
disclosures 
in 
the 
coming 
years 
with 
the 
recommendations of the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD). In addition, 
FCX is continuously striving to embrace evolving stakeholder expectations and to implement best 
practices. 
FCX recognizes that mining and metal processing impacts the natural environment. Our 
goal is to conduct our mining and processing operations in a manner that minimizes adverse 
impacts on the environment and supports protection of the ecosystems through responsible 
environmental stewardship. To that end, FCX understands that environmental protection and 
stewardship are the keys to ensuring the long-term viability of our business, including maintaining 
the necessary support from our host communities and governments. Our policy objectives include 
minimizing environmental impacts using risk management strategies based on valid data and 
sound science.

FCX is committed to validating all of our copper producing sites, including our mines and 
smelting and refining facilities, with the Copper Mark, a comprehensive assurance framework 
designed to demonstrate the copper industry’s responsible production practices. To achieve the 
Copper Mark, 
each 
site 
is required 
to complete 
an 
external assurance process 
to 
assess 
conformance with 32 environmental, social and governance requirements. To date, a total of seven 
sites, including the Miami Smelter, have been validated. 
With that environmental commitment in mind, FMMI nevertheless believes that some of 
the specific proposed NESHAP revisions are not appropriate, and accordingly require revision. 
FMMI’s comments on the Proposed NESHAP Revisions are organized as follows. First, this letter 
describes in summary fashion the primary substantive concerns raised by the proposed revisions 
including a narrative explanation and suggested resolution for those concerns. 
Second, Table 
1 
attached to this letter sets out FMMI’s specific comments and suggested revisions to the actual 
regulatory language text. Importantly, Table 
1 addresses not only the primary substantive concerns 
discussed in this letter but also additional comments and suggested revisions to the regulation text 
to correct apparent errors, resolve internal inconsistencies and provide greater clarity. The third 
part of FMMI’s comments is a set of Attachments A thru L that contain the underlying analysis 
supporting the comments raised in this letter and Table 1. 
i 
The MACT floor PM limits for the Anode Refining Department should be the same 
as the existing (unchanged) limits for similar affected sources managing molten 
material. 
EPA has proposed a MACT-floor based emission limit for the Anode Refining Department 
based upon testing 
at the Asarco smelter (the other primary copper smelter subject 
to this 
NESHAP). But there is already an existing technology-based limit for similar emission points in 
the current NESHAP that 
is applicable and more appropriate than the Asarco-based 
limit. 
Specifically, in the existing NESHAP (and unchanged with the Proposed NESHAP Revisions) 
capture and control systems for process gases from vessels managing molten material, including 
the concentrate dryers, smelting vessels, slag cleaning vessels, and copper converter departments, 
must meet a concentration-based filterable particulate matter (“fPM”) emission limitation of 23 
mg/dscm. (see 40 CFR §§ 63.1444(a)(2), 63.1444(b)(2)(ii), 63.1444(c)(3)(ii), and 63.1444(d)(6)).! 
This is a consistent technology-based limit that is currently applied to multiple gas streams similar 
to those from the anode furnace, and there is no technical justification for deviating from this 
established standard for the anode refining department. For the FMMI facility, this concentration- 
based limit would apply to the aisle scrubber stack, which discharges captured and controlled gases 
originating from both the anode refining department and copper converter department, with each 
affected source subject to the same 23 mg/dscm limit. Accordingly, EPA should set the MACT 
floor for the anode refining department based on a concentration limitation of 23 mg/dscm. 
Even if there was a justification to treat the anode furnace differently from every other 
molten material vessel (which there is not), EPA does not have sufficient data to set a mass rate 
limit for the anode refining process vent MACT floor. The data EPA used in the Proposed 
' The major furnace left out of the current rule standards is the anode furnace. But EPA addressed the anode furnace 
vent stream in the Asarco 2015 consent decree and applied the same 23 mg/dscm emission limitation. 
See EPA-HQ- 
OAR-2020-0430-0018 (Asarco consent decree) at 418 (p. 27)(implicitly acknowledging that this is a similar vent 
stream).

NESHAP Revisions is not representative of the covered sources. Indeed, all of the anode refining 
point source fPM test data used by EPA in the calculation of the MACT floor emission rates came 
from the Asarco smelter. See 87 Fed. Reg. 1632 (noting that EPA had anode refining point source 
test data for only one source). As a result, the MACT floor Upper Prediction Limit (“UPL”) 
calculation is based on a 
single facility. The UPL does not reflect the operating performance of 
FMMP’s anode refining baghouse and does not reflect the “best 5 sources” (or all available sources 
when as here there are less than 5 total) as prescribed by EPA procedure for source categories 
containing less than 30 sources. 
Direct data regarding the performance of the anode furnace baghouse using EPA test 
methods is not available at FMMI due to the configuration of this facility. Emissions from the 
FMMI anode baghouse are routed to the aisle scrubber where it is combined with additional vent 
streams. The aisle scrubber then provides additional emissions control for the combined vent 
stream (including the anode baghouse effluent) before it is emitted from the aisle scrubber stack. 
The current vent ducting configuration does not permit intermediate testing of the discrete anode 
baghouse effluent that meets the location requirements of the EPA sampling methods, and as a 
result, there is no available testing of this discrete vent using EPA-approved methods.” Moreover, 
testing at this location would not account for any additional pollution control accomplished in the 
aisle scrubber. 
The only available emissions data specifically capturing FMMI’s anode refining baghouse 
are from testing that was conducted in November 2018 in connection with assessing baghouse 
performance. 
These measurements were focused on the baghouse performance for engineering 
estimations and the sample location did not comply with EPA method requirements. The FMMI 
anode refining baghouse does not discharge directly to the environment (it is routed to the aisle 
scrubber), and these internal process test results were not provided when responding to EPA’s 
Information Collection Request in connection with this rulemaking. Regardless, incorporation of 
these results into EPA’s MACT floor analysis provides 
a more complete data set and should 
strengthen EPA’s understanding of the anode furnace baghouse emissions. Accordingly, a copy of 
the 
test report prepared 
by SLR International Corporation 
is included 
as Attachment 
B.? 
Importantly, if FMMI performance test data are considered, the variability in the data set increases 
(standard deviation of 2.2 mg/dscm including the FMMI data, and 1.6 mg/dscm with only the 
Asarco data). Recalculation of the 99% Upper Prediction Limit (“UPL”) with the FMMI anode 
refining process vent data included yields a UPL of 7.3 mg/dscm. 
Please see UPL calculations 
included as Attachment C. Again, FMMI is not suggesting that this performance data should be 
used 
as 
a basis for an anode-only MACT floor, 
as noted above the existing 23 mg/dscm 
concentration-based limit should be used. But the performance data does illustrate that a more 
complete data collection would be necessary to support an anode-only MACT floor calculation 
that is representative of the covered sources. 
? An explanation of the testing limitations of the anode baghouse effluent ductwork configuration prepared by FMMI’s 
consultant, Ramboll, is included as Attachment A. 
3 As noted above, these SLR measurements do not meet all applicable regulatory performance test requirements. For 
example, documentation of the test runs and analytical results are less rigorous, and the only available sampling port 
did not meet the spacing requirements of EPA test methods. For more discussion, see Attachment A. 
3

In summary, the MACT floor UPL calculation derived by EPA comes from an extremely 
limited data set 
at 
a single facility, clearly does not represent the “best 
5 sources,” and 
is 
inconsistent with the engineering test data obtained by FMMI. 
A complete data collection to support 
a robust MACT floor calculation would require 
assessment of fPM originating from the anode baghouse at FMMI, but as noted above, the ducting 
configuration at the FMMI facility requires this measurement as part of a combined vent stream at 
the aisle scrubber. Thus, this data collection would require an evaluation using the combined gas 
stream procedures outlined in 40 CFR § 63.1446. The necessary underlying data for this complex 
process does not currently exist and is unnecessary given the uniform concentration-based limit 
applied to all similar vessels under the primary copper smelting NESHAP. Accordingly, FMMI 
requests that EPA adopt a MACT limit for the anode refining department of 23 mg/dscm, which 
is the same as the current limit for four other similar fPM-containing gas streams from molten 
material vessels. 
IL. 
EPA’s Approach to the Process Fugitive Emissions Currently Exiting from Roofline 
Vents Require Several Revisions. 
A. 
EPA’s residual risk analysis overstates acute non-cancer risks and does not 
support the need for additional controls on the roofline vents to meet the 
agency’s “acceptability” criteria. 
EPA has proposed additional emission controls for the anode furnace roofline vent based 
on its conclusion that current emissions do not meet its “acceptable risk” criteria under EPA’s RTR 
process. See 87 Fed. Reg. 1643. Specifically, the agency concluded (i) its acute, non-cancer risk 
screening assessment for arsenic yielded 
a hazard quotient (“HQ”) of 7, and (ii) emissions 
modeling predicted very limited exceedances of the three-month average primary National 
Ambient Air Quality Standard (“NAAQS”) 
for lead. 
Jd. Review of the available scientific 
literature, site data, and EPA precedent suggests that EPA’s risk analysis overstates these risks and 
the current emissions meet EPA’s “acceptable risk” thresholds. Accordingly, control of the anode 
furnace roofline vents must be justified, if at all, under EPA’s “ample margin of safety analysis” 
or its “reasonable further progress” technology-based standard. 
1. 
The acute non-cancer threshold for arsenic employed by EPA in its risk 
assessment is overly conservative and not supported by 
a balanced 
assessment of the scientific literature. 
EPA’s RTR for acute non-cancer arsenic risk relies on an arsenic inhalation toxicity value 
that does not reflect the latest scientific evidence for acute exposures. Specifically, EPA only cites 
a reference exposure level (“REL”) developed by the California Office of Environmental Health 
Hazard Assessment (“OEHHA”) in 2008 for acute (1 hour) exposures for arsenic (0.2 ug/m3). 
The California REL, however, 
is based 
on 
a poorly documented 
and outdated 
study by 
Nagymajtenyi et al. (1985) that focuses on potential developmental effects. But the study suffers 
from several substantial weaknesses including the failure to adequately distinguish maternal 
toxicity 
from 
the 
allegedly observed 
developmental 
effects. 
Indeed, 
EPA 
has previously 
acknowledged the “uncertainty and conservative nature” of the basis for the acute HQ for arsenic 
based on the Nagymaitenyi study. See Integrated Iron and Steel Manufacturing NESHAP, 85 Fed. 
4

Reg. 42074, 42083 (Jul. 13, 2020) (acknowledging that there are “data gaps and uncertainties in 
acute reference values”). Several other regulatory authorities have rejected the Nagymaitenyi study 
as a basis for deriving toxicity values, and have instead relied on a 1999 study (Holson et al. 1999) 
conducted according to Good Laboratory Practices (“GLP’’) with associated better documentation 
and study design. 
Relying on the Holson 
et al. (1999) study, the Texas Commission on Environmental 
Quality (“TCEQ”) derived an acute reference value (ReV) of 9.9 ug/m3 and an acute effects 
screening level (“ESL”) of 3 ug/m3 for short-term 
(1 
hour) exposures (as compared 
to the 
California REL of 0.2 ug/m3). TCEQ describes ESLs as “‘chemical concentrations in air that are 
safe [that] protect human health in the general public, including children, the elderly, pregnant 
women, and people with pre-existing health conditions.”* The TCEQ 1-hour ESL for arsenic of 3 
ug/m3 
is based on good science, protective 
of public health, 
and suitable 
for use 
as 
the 
“acceptability” threshold for the agency’s RTR review. Importantly, if a non-cancer 1-hour arsenic 
threshold of 3 ug/m3 
is used, the HQ for arsenic drops to 0.5--well below 
| (meeting EPA’s 
“acceptable risk” threshold). 
A description of the basis for the OEHHA REL, the newer developmental studies, and 
regulatory reviews by the USEPA 
and National Advisory Committee for Acute Exposure 
Guideline Levels for Hazardous Substances (NAC/AEGL Committee) and TCEQ prepared by 
FMMI’s consultant, Ramboll is included as Attachment D. 
In addition, EPA’s risk evaluations for acute non-cancer arsenic risks in prior NESHAPs 
do not support its determination here that an HQ of 7 results in unacceptable risks. For example, 
in the prior NESHAP for Primary Aluminum Reduction Plants, EPA considered an acute non- 
cancer HQ for arsenic as high as 10 to be acceptable. See 80 Fed. Reg. 62390, 62398 (Oct. 15, 
2015) (finding that the “prebake subcategories are acceptable” notwithstanding an HQ of 10 based 
on arsenic emissions). The HQ of 7 estimated by EPA for the primary copper smelting NESHAP 
falls under the HQ previously approved for Primary Aluminum Reduction Plants. 
In summary, 
modeled short term emission impacts of arsenic for the primary copper smelting NESHAP do not 
support EPA’s conclusion that acute non-cancer risks are unacceptable under the RTR metrics. 
2. 
Based 
on 
a comprehensive 
analysis 
of both 
the monitoring 
and 
modeling data, there is no compelling evidence that current emissions 
threaten an exceedance of the lead NAAQS. 
EPA’s 3-month average lead modeling based upon estimates of actual emissions from the 
FMMI facility identified a maximum 3-month average for lead of 0.17 ug/m3 as compared to the 
primary NAAQS of 0.15 ug/m3, or a modeled value that exceeds the NAAQS by only 13%. See 
87 Fed. Reg. 1638. Moreover, that modeled exceedance applies only to a single census block or 
about 5 people in total. /d. The modeling results from similar runs using allowable emissions are 
somewhat higher, but still include maximum modeled values that only moderately exceed the lead 
NAAQS ina 
very limited area. /d. Again, these are modeled values based on emissions estimates 
+ TCEQ Fact Sheet General Information About Regulatory Guidelines (2010), available at 
https://www.tceq. texas. gov/assets/public/implementation/tox/dsd/facts/general.pdf 
5

impacting a very small area adjacent to the Miami smelter, and as is discussed below, the available 
ambient air monitoring data does not support an actual exceedance of the NAAQS. 
EPA acknowledges in the preamble that the lead NAAQS contains multiple conservative 
assumptions regarding risks from lead exposure and “includes an adequate margin of safety to be 
protective of all sub-populations 
at risk, especially children.” 
Jd. 
Similarly, 
in 2016, EPA 
reaffirmed its conclusion that the current lead NAAQS is conservative and health protective. 81 
Fed. Reg. 71906 (Oct. 18, 2016). As part of its analysis, the agency highlighted the uncertainty in 
drawing conclusions regarding potential health impacts from ambient air exposures at or close to 
the NAAQS level. Jd. at 71926 (recognizing the “uncertainty in characterizing the relationship of 
effects on IQ with blood Pb levels below those represented in the evidence base and also in 
projecting the magnitude of blood Pb response to ambient air Pb concentrations at and below the 
level of the current standard.”) Review of the most recent scientific literature on low dose lead 
exposures in children reinforces the very conservative nature of the current NAAQS. At the very 
low doses associated with the lead NAAQS, it is very difficult to isolate the impacts of the lead 
because of “confounding” where the measured association between an exposure variable and an 
outcome is distorted by an effect of a third variable. As discussed in the Ramboll toxicity memo 
included as Attachment D, 
a recent publication by Wilson and Wilson (2016) suggests that 
uncontrolled confounding by parental and household factors with several of the cohorts incorrectly 
support the association between health effects and low blood lead levels. They indicate that “while 
the effects of higher levels of lead exposure are not disputed, overestimation of health effects at 
low lead exposure has significant implications for policy-makers endeavoring to protect public 
health through cost-effective regulations.” Another study by Van Landingham et al. (2020) reaches 
a very similar conclusion. See Attachment D. 
FMMI supports EPA’s overall goal of reducing lead exposures of those children at greatest 
risk 
of adverse 
health 
effects, 
but 
the most 
recent 
science 
shows 
that 
ambient 
air 
lead 
concentrations generally equivalent to the existing lead NAAQS are fully health protective. As 
noted above, EPA has based its conclusion of unacceptable risk on modeled impacts in a small 
area that are roughly equivalent to lead NAAQS. This result contrasts sharply with other RTR 
NESHAP 
revisions where 
failure 
of the “acceptable 
risk” 
criteria hinged upon modeled 
exceedances of the lead NAAQS where those modeled exceedances prior to additional control 
were frequently 10 times or more the lead NAAQS. See e.g., National Emissions Standards for 
Hazardous Air Pollutants from Secondary Lead Smelting; Final Rules, 77 Fed. Reg. 556, 562-563 
& Table 4 (Jan. 5, 2012). 
In addition, as EPA notes in the preamble, there is ambient monitoring data for lead that is 
available for a monitor in close proximity to the FMMI facility (approximately 1400 meters away). 
See 
87 Fed. Reg. 
1640. This data reinforces the point that lead impacts do not cause an 
“unacceptable risk.” Specifically, EPA states that the annual average lead concentration at this 
monitoring site during 2019 was 0.022 ug/m3 or less than 15% of the NAAQS. 
EPA points to 
potentially higher results predicted based upon modeling, but again the modeling based on actual 
emissions only suggests a single NAAQS exceedance of 13% perhaps impacting 5 people. 
Moreover, in recent years FMMI installed facility-wide improvements to its air emissions 
control systems to ensure compliance with revised SO standards, but those modifications also 
improved metal HAP controls. All of these systems were operational by 2018. A review of a more 
6

complete set of the ambient monitoring data from this post-modification period reinforces the 
conclusion that there is no compelling evidence that there is 
a substantial likelihood of lead 
NAAQS exceedances in the vicinity of the current FMMI facility. For example, the annual average 
lead concentration at the monitor location for 2020 was 0.014 ug/m3, and the annual average 
concentration for 2021 was 0.019 ug/m3, both values well below the already low 2019 data cited 
by EPA in the preamble and approximately an order of magnitude below the NAAQS. Moreover, 
during the entirety of the last two years of data consisting of 119 discrete daily average readings, 
there is not a single daily mean lead concentration that exceeds the 3-month average lead NAAQS. 
Indeed, there are only three daily average readings over that 2-year period that even equal or 
exceed 50% of the 3-month average NAAQS. Finally, this measured drop 
in ambient lead 
concentrations has been accompanied by an increase in the overall production rate at the smelter. 
A 
plot 
of the 
rolling 3-month lead 
concentration average versus 
facility production 
rate 
demonstrates that lead ambient concentrations have dropped (particularly in the last two years) as 
production has increased. See plot below: 
Annual Throughput vs Ambient Lead Concentration Trends 
(2012-2021) 
  
  
, 0.16 
Lead NAAQS 
900,000 
Ss 
ae re 
oS... 
slaliieiend 
oe 
oO 9 0.14 
850,000 
8 
'E 
0.12 
800,000 
Sg 
=~ 
= 
E 
@ 
01 
750,000 
= 
= 
a 
ob 
= 
= 
OD 
= 0.08 
700,000 
3 
°o 
= 
S 
= 
© 
- 
= 0.06 
650,000 
& 
g 
5 
8 
5 
5 0.04 
600,000 
oO 
a 
5 0.02 
550,000 
= a) 
500,000 
& 
& 
So 
“ 
% 
2 
o 
\ 
Sy 
oy 
Sy 
Sy 
Sy 
oy 
oy 
Sh 
Sh 
PP Pht 
sg 
gh 
gh 
A 
gh 
Re 
see 
3 Month Lead Average 
eee [ead NAAQS (ug/m3) 
eer Annual Concentrate Smelter Throughput 
ee 
| jnear (3 Month Lead Average 
) 
ee Linear (Annual Concentrate Smelter Throughput) 
A copy of the lead monitoring data for the period of 2012 through 2021 is included as Attachment 
E,

EPA established the structure of the current RTR process as part of the Benzene NESHAP. 
In that rulemaking, EPA stated that it was not imposing “a rigid line for acceptability,” but rather 
an assessment that weighs a series of health measures and factors including “the number of persons 
exposed [at elevated risk]” and “estimation uncertainties associated with the risk measures.” 54 
Fed. Reg. 38044, 30845 (Sept. 
14, 
1989). Both metrics 
in this case caution against 
a rigid 
application of the NAAQS based on modeled results 
to conclude current emissions 
fail the 
“acceptable risk” criteria. As discussed above, the modeled NAAQS exceedances near the FMMI 
facility are small and isolated, and ambient monitoring data suggests those exceedances do not 
actually occur. 
EPA should conclude that risks based on current lead and arsenic emissions are acceptable. 
B. 
Regardless of whether additional controls are imposed, regulation of process 
fugitive emissions exiting from the roofline vents should be addressed via a 
single combined emission limit. 
The FMMI smelter building is a single structure that includes a smelting vessel (IsaSmelt 
furnace or “ISA”), slag cleaning vessel (electric furnace or “ELF”), a copper converter department, 
and an anode refining department. 
While there is some geographical separation between these 
affected sources, the explicit distinction drawn in the proposed rule between roofline vents based 
on their relative proximity to these affected sources is artificial because there is open air flow 
between these sources. In addition, there are related support processes between the affected sources 
such as matte ladle transfers and slag returns between the furnaces and the converters. Similarly, 
there are blister ladle transfers, anode slag returns, and ladle cleaning operations between the 
converters and anodes furnaces. Process fugitive emissions will therefore vary across the roofline 
vents based on the operating and transfer status of various processes. 
Accordingly, from an air 
quality regulatory perspective, it does not make sense to establish separate and distinct limits on 
individual roofline vents. 
Based upon the physical configuration and comingling of process fugitive emissions from 
affected sources and associated support processes, FMMI believes that process fugitive emissions 
exiting from the roofline vents should be regulated via a single combined emission limit that would 
be equal to the sum of the relevant UPLs less any emission reductions imposed by EPA’s residual 
risk and MACT technology review. To the extent that FMMI installs additional capture and control 
systems with discrete stacks to reduce existing process fugitive emissions (utilizing either existing 
or new control devices), the fPM emissions exiting such stacks would be subject to a 23 mg/dscm 
limit. 
See 
40 
CFR 
§§ 
63.1444(a)(2), 
63.1444(b)(2)(ii), 
63.1444(c)(3)(ii), 
63.1444(d)(6), 
63.1444(i)(1), and 63.1444(j)(2) as proposed in Table 1. 
This regulatory approach will allow FMMI to assess all of the affected sources contributing 
to process fugitive emissions exiting from the roofline vents and evaluate the most efficient 
combination of additional capture and control systems and potentially other process modifications 
to meet the new combined emission limit at the least cost and greatest online reliability. 
These 
issues and potential capture and control configurations are discussed in more detail in an Analysis 
of the Cost and Feasibility of Possible Control Strategies for Process Fugitive Emissions Exiting 
the Roofline Vents prepared by FMMI’s consultant, Gas Cleaning Technologies (“GCT”), 
included as Attachment F.

Because the process fugitive emissions currently exiting from the roofline vents are the 
primary drivers for EPA’s risk assessment conclusions, FMMI conducted a modeling exercise to 
demonstrate that the particular roofline vent where the emissions escape does not substantially 
change the magnitude of the offsite impact. 
Specifically, FMMI ran three modelling runs where 
each run modeled the entirety of the combined process fugitive emissions through one of the three 
roofline vents as modeled by EPA (e.g., converter, anode, and average of ISA and ELF).° The 
modeling confirms that the critical offsite impact areas are largely unchanged between the 
modeling runs. 
See Attachment G. Thus, establishing a combined emission limitation for the 
collective process fugitive emissions exiting all of the roofline vents instead of specific emission 
limitations for each roofline does not significantly impact the risk analysis. 
Cc; 
EPA’s preamble discussion of the FMMI process related to the process fugitive 
emissions 
exiting 
the 
roofline 
vents 
contains 
two 
important 
misunderstandings. 
1. 
EPA improperly combined and averaged the emissions exiting the ISA 
and ELF roofline vents. 
EPA’s MACT floor analysis of the roofline emissions data improperly averages the 
emission test results for two vessels that have distinct operations. The proposed rule Preamble 
states that FMMI has two smelting vessels (see 87 Fed. Reg. 1633) implicitly suggesting these two 
vessels have the same operating function, but this is not correct. 
FMMI operates an IsaSmelt 
furnace (ISA), which is the smelting vessel. In FMMI’s configuration, the electric furnace (ELF) 
receives material from the ISA and is a slag cleaning or slag settling vessel. While the two vessels 
refer to matte and slag tapping operations, each vessel (e.g., the ISA and ELF) has 
a distinct 
operating function and is considered a separate affected source under Subpart QQQ. Roofline 
sampling results are available for each independent operation. Rather than averaging the data for 
these two independent operations, the sum of the individual UPLs of those emission rates and the 
UPLs for the converter and anode roof line vents should be combined (e.g., four roofline locations) 
to create a single emission limit for all of the process fugitive emissions exiting the roofline vents. 
2. 
EPA erroneously describes the FMMI converters as having “primary 
and secondary capture systems and controls, but no tertiary controls.” 
FMMI’s Hoboken converters use a side-flue intake capture system and 
the roofline canopy system is properly described as a tertiary capture 
system. 
In its preamble discussion with regard to converters, EPA states that “Freeport has primary 
and secondary capture and controls, but no tertiary controls.” 
87 Fed. Reg. 1616, 1634 (Jan. 11, 
2022). To clarify, the Hoboken converters at FMMI’s copper converter department use a side-flue 
capture system. Only copper converter departments using Peirce-Smith converters have primary 
and secondary capture systems for purposes of Subpart QQQ. While these terms are not defined 
under Subpart QQQ, 40 C.F.R. § 63.1444(d)(2) requires that the capture system design for copper 
> Note that FMMI modeled the ISA and ELF as a single averaged emission point for this analysis in order to duplicate 
EPA’s modeling approach, but these two roof vents are separate emission points. FMMI has developed its combined 
roof vent UPL emissions calculations treating them as separate emission points. See Attachments F and H for 
additional discussion.

converter departments using Peirce-Smith converters “must include use of a primary hood that 
covers the entire mouth of the converter vessel when the copper converter is positioned for 
blowing” and “[a]dditional hoods (e.g., secondary hoods) or other capture devices 
. 
. 
. as needed 
to achieve the opacity limit in [40 C.F.R. 
§ 63.1444(d)(4)].” 
In contrast, for copper converter 
departments using Hoboken converters, 40 C.F.R. 
§ 63.1444(d)(3) specifies that “the capture 
system must collect all process off-gas vented during blowing through the side-flue intake on each 
converter vessel.” 
40 C.F.R. 
§ 63.1444(d)(5) then specifies 
a 6.2 mg/dscm non-sulfuric acid 
particulate matter limit for process off-gases that are discharged from “any Pierce-Smith converter 
primary hood capture system or Hoboken converter side-flue intake capture system.” The EPA 
has thus recognized in the existing primary copper smelter NESHAP the differences between the 
capture systems for Hoboken and Peirce-Smith converters. 
The initial Subpart QQQ rulemaking history confirms this understanding as the 4% opacity 
limit for copper converter department building roof monitors at 40 C.F.R. § 63. 1444(d)(4)(i) and 
the 23 mg/dscm particulate matter limit for secondary capture systems at 40 C.F.R. § 63.1444(d)(6) 
was derived based on the fixed or sliding secondary hoods and an air curtain secondary hood used 
to capture secondary or fugitive emissions that escape the primary capture system at smelters using 
Peirce-Smith converters. 
See EPA, National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants 
(NESHAP) for Primary Copper Smelters — Background Information for Promulgated Standards, 
EPA-453/R-02-0003, at 2-18 and 3-6 (hereinafter “Background Information Document”). Out of 
the six smelters considered during the Subpart QQQ rulemaking, five used Pierce-Smith converters 
with a primary hood and a secondary hood or air curtain as the secondary capture system. See id. 
at Tables 3-1 and A-1. Secondary hoods are technically infeasible for Hoboken converters because 
of the way that off-gas exits these vessels. Therefore, no secondary (or tertiary) capture systems 
or controls were identified or required for the Phelps Dodge (now FMMI) copper converter 
department using Hoboken converters. As EPA concluded, “[b]ased on the opacity data and other 
information available to us for this smelter, we believe that the Phelps Dodge Miami smelter can 
meet the standards under the final rule without having to install additional air pollution control 
equipment.” Jd. at 6-2. 
While FMMI subsequently installed 
a new roofline canopy system in 2017 as part of 
facility-wide improvements to ensure the Miami area’s compliance with revised standards for 
sulfur dioxide (SO2), this system does not constitute a “secondary capture system” as described 
above for Peirce-Smith converters under Subpart QQQ. Instead, this system is akin to the El Paso 
smelter’s building evacuation system (which evacuated 
the entire converter building 
to 
a 
particulate control device) that EPA characterized as a tertiary capture system during the Subpart 
QQQ rulemaking. 
See 67 Fed. Reg. 40,478, 40,484 (June 12, 2002); Background Information 
Document, at Table A-1. While a building evacuation system would help ensure compliance with 
the 4% opacity standard, EPA did not establish any specific requirements for such 
a system. 
Indeed, EPA expressly considered and rejected a converter building evacuation system in the 
development of the Subpart QQQ opacity standard. 
See 67 Fed. Reg. 
at 40,486. 
As result, 
characterization of FMMI’s roofline canopy system (which is designed to capture process fugitive 
emissions from various sources that are then routed to a SO2 scrubber) as a tertiary capture system 
would be of no consequence under current Subpart QQQ requirements. 
10

D. 
The “Ample Margin of Safety” second step of the RTR process does not justify 
additional controls for non-cancer impacts of arsenic and lead. 
Unlike with cancer risks, EPA has not established risk-based thresholds under its “ample 
margin of safety” analysis for non-cancer impacts of arsenic and lead. As noted above, a protective 
ambient air threshold for arsenic that 
is supported by 
the available scientific literature on 
developmental health risks from arsenic inhalation exposures results in an HQ well below 1.° 
Similarly, EPA has described the lead NAAQS as “including an adequate margin of safety to be 
protective of all sub-populations at risk, especially children” (87 Fed. Reg. 1638), and there is no 
compelling evidence that existing FMMI lead emissions threaten a NAAQS exceedance. 
Accordingly, additional controls on the process fugitive emissions exiting the roofline 
vents must be justified (if at all) under the beyond the floor (“BTF”) MACT standard. 
E. 
The justification for additional controls of lead and arsenic is marginal when 
cost is considered under the BTF MACT standard. 
In the very limited time available between the publication of the proposed NESHAP 
revisions and the closure of the comment period, FMMI has done what it can to evaluate potential 
strategies to control the anode furnace roof line fugitives. 
As EPA notes in the rule preamble, 
there are multiple potential strategies to accomplish this control including (i) direct control of the 
roof vent, (ii) secondary hood controls within the building to capture emissions before they reach 
the roof vent, and (iii) some combination of both approaches. FMMI commissioned Gas Cleaning 
Technologies (“GCT”), 
an engineering company with extensive experience controlling {PM 
emissions in smelting facilities, to develop possible conceptual scopes and to provide a cost 
estimate for each. In all cases, a baghouse was used to remove the (PM. A copy of GCT’s analysis 
is included as Attachment F. 
In summary, both capital costs and operating costs for the proposed emission controls far 
exceed the estimates 
in EPA’s analysis. EPA estimated 
a capital cost of $5,887,000 and an 
annualized cost of $1,558,000 or a cost effectiveness value of $367,000 per ton of HAP reduction. 
GCT identified several problems with EPA’s cost estimate including under-sizing of flow volume 
required for dust capture, failure to provide for corrosion protection with a lime injection system, 
the need for a multi-compartment baghouse, and the cost associated with retrofitting such a large 
system into the limited space available. Taking these factors into account, GCT estimated that the 
capital cost of a system to control anode process fugitive emissions would be between $24,200,000 
and $65,600,000 (depending upon the design assumptions) and an annualized cost of between 
$4,653,000 and $11,594,000. 
These more realistic estimates yield a cost effectiveness range of 
$1,095,0000 to $2,728,000 per ton of HAP reduction. Even at the low end of this range, the cost 
effectiveness value is at the extreme upper end of the range that EPA has historically concluded 
justify additional controls for metal HAPs, and at the upper end would clearly be not cost effective 
based upon established EPA metrics. Moreover, FMMI has no confidence that the reduction of 4.5 
tons per year of metal HAPs based upon a 90% removal efficiency of the anode furnace roof line 
  
° FMMI notes that EPA concluded that an HQ of 2 using the California REL did not justify additional controls under 
its ample margin of safety analysis. See 87 Fed. Reg. 1643. 
11

fugitives is possible at the lower end of the cost range. The lower cost estimate is based exclusively 
on the use of secondary hooding over process operations. 
But it is not clear if the necessary level 
of gas capture is possible with secondary hooding, or if alternatively, some amount of canopy 
capture at the roofline may be required. Roofline canopy systems are much more expensive, and 
if necessary, will drive the costs higher than the cost effectiveness threshold. FMMI cannot answer 
these process scope questions without additional investigation and engineering that was not 
possible within the limited comment period. 
GCT’s engineering evaluation does suggest, however, that significant cost savings are 
possible if the 4.5 tons per year of metal HAP reductions are achieved based upon a combined 
limit for the process fugitive emissions exiting the roofline vents. This regulatory approach allows 
FMMI to design a system that maximizes the cost effectiveness of this additional control. For 
example, a combined limit makes it more likely that FMMI can utilize excess capacity in the anode 
furnace baghouse to control some portion of the process fugitive emissions. 
Use of the anode 
furnace baghouse has the added benefit that the vent gas is routed to the aisle scrubber, which 
provides SO> control.’ GCT states in its engineering analysis of the various approaches to reducing 
emissions of metal HAPs exiting from the roofline vents that it expects that a combined limit 
approach will prove to have the lowest cost of control for any of the available options. 
See 
Attachment F. 
As noted above, FMMI urges EPA to adopt this combined limit approach to the process 
fugitive emissions exiting the roofline vents both because this approach reflects the nature of the 
emissions and because this would be the most cost-effective way 
to achieve the proposed 
emissions reductions. FMMI’s consultant, Ramboll, calculated an UPL-based combined emission 
limit for fPM of 6.5 lbs/hr. 
This combined limit is based upon the same 90% reduction in the 
anode roofline emissions as proposed by EPA and is accordingly functionally equivalent to EPA’s 
proposal. Ramboll used the same statistical procedure that EPA used to calculate the proposed 
facility-wide mercury limit based upon a 90% reduction in the aisle scrubber. See Ramboll’s UPL 
Calculation for the Combined Limit for Process Fugitive Emissions Exiting the Roofline Vents, 
included as Attachment H. 
F. 
Even if additional controls on process fugitive emissions exiting the roofline 
vents are warranted, EPA should permit the three-year compliance period 
applicable under 42 U.S.C. § 7412(i)(3). 
Congress established two different timeframes for compliance with NESHAP revisions: 
the default period of 3 years, 42 U.S.C. § 7412(i)(3), and a shorter 2-year compliance period for 
revisions necessary to protect public health. /d. 
at 
§ 7412(f(4)(B). 
The proposed NESHAP 
revisions include a two-year compliance period for existing anode refining department roofline 
vents subject to new limits assuming the adoption of additional controls based on EPA’s Section 
7412(f) finding that the risks from arsenic and lead are unacceptable. However, as demonstrated 
above, the appropriate inquiry for additional controls for the anode refining department is under 
7 Similarly, a combined emission limit approach will provide more opportunities for process and feed modifications 
that have the potential to reduce process fugitive emissions. See EPA preamble discussion at 87 Fed. Reg. 1635 
12

Section 7412(d)(2) and (3). As a result, in the event that EPA concludes additional control of these 
process fugitive emissions is appropriate then a three-year compliance period should apply. 
There are also significant practical reasons for 
a three-year compliance period. 
As 
described above the design and engineering of the most cost efficient and reliable combination of 
control options to achieve the targeted emission reductions is complex. It involves multiple time 
consuming steps to (i) assess the emission sources, (ii) evaluate the potential control options for 
effectiveness, reliability and cost, (iii) design engineering of the final scope, (iv) procurement in a 
current environment where supply issues are common, (v) construction, and finally (vi) startup. It 
will be challenging to accomplish this in three years, much less two. Please see the GCT Analysis 
of Roofline Vent Control Strategies included as Attachment F for additional discussion of these 
issues. 
Ill. 
The proposed mercury emissions limitations are not justified based on either BTF 
MACT considerations or RTR risk analysis, and if implemented will not work in 
anything approaching a cost effective manner. 
A. 
EPA has not demonstrated a risk-based justification for additional mercury 
controls, and as a result, any additional mercury controls must be justified 
based on a BITF MACT technology-based standard. 
In the proposed NESHAP revisions, EPA calculated for the first time a facility wide MACT 
floor for mercury emissions of 0.01 lbs/hr, and then proposed further reductions from the MACT 
floor based on a BTF analysis to 0.0043 Ibs/hr.’ See 87 Fed. Reg. 1636. EPA’s technology-based 
analysis identified activated carbon injection and a polishing baghouse as available technology 
that is capable of achieving this emission reduction. Nevertheless, in justification for this new 
standard, EPA states: “EPA is proposing this BTF limit for mercury because mercury is a highly 
toxic, persistent and bioaccumulative HAP. 
. 
. .” Jd. But EPA conducted a risk analysis as part of 
this rulemaking that specifically addressed mercury emissions. /d. at 1629. As part of this analysis, 
EPA did not identify any mercury emissions that did not meet its “acceptable risk” threshold or as 
a basis for an “ample margin of safety” analysis. /d. 
at 1642-44. Thus, to the extent that new 
mercury emissions controls are appropriate, they must be justified based on the technology-based 
BTF analysis that includes consideration of both cost and feasibility. 
B. 
The proposed new mercury controls (¢.g., activated carbon injection in the 
acid plant tail gas with a polishing baghouse) are not used by any facility in 
this source category and are unsuited for the process conditions at issue. 
FMM is not aware of any primary copper smelters that successfully utilize an activated 
carbon injection into the acid plant tail gas followed by a polishing baghouse to remove mercury. 
EPA has not identified such a facility in its preamble and the only relevant citation to the docket 
is EPA’s “Estimated Costs for Beyond-the-Floor Controls for Mercury Emissions from Primary 
Copper Smelting Facilities” (Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0059). 
But this analysis 
S EPA also proposed a mercury limit for new converter facilities of 0.00097 Ibs/hr of mercury based upon emissions 
measured from the Asarco facility. 
But this is an inappropriate basis to set a new facility emission limit because the 
Asarco facility feedstock simply does not contain mercury, and as a result, mercury controls are unnecessary. 
13

addresses only cost, and simply assumes a 90% mercury control efficiency of the acid plant tail 
gas. The document does not contain a citation or other explanation regarding how EPA derived 
that control efficiency for this unique application. Similarly, EPA’s Technology Review for the 
Primary Copper Smelting Source Category (Docket ID No. EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430-0033) did 
not identify activated carbon and a polishing baghouse as available technology to control mercury 
emissions from the acid plant tail gas. 
Review of chemistry and physical conditions of the acid plant tail gas and the mechanism 
for mercury removal with activated carbon identifies multiple problems with EPA’s choice of 
technology and assumption regarding its efficiency. First, the acid plant tail gas is a wet gas stream. 
Condensation of water on the activated carbon will effectively block the pores of the carbon and 
severely restrict its ability to adsorb mercury (the vast majority of adsorption sites are within the 
pores). Second, the tail gas contains residual SO2 and SO; in higher concentrations than the trace 
mercury content, and these compounds will compete for adsorption sites and inhibit mercury 
removal. 
Finally, the tail gas mercury concentration is very low (<10 ug/dscm) and activated 
carbon systems are generally not efficient at removing mercury at these very low concentrations. 
All of these factors have been shown in other applications to significantly reduce mercury removal 
efficiency. FMMI retained GCT (an engineering consultant with specialized expertise in air 
emissions abatement projects like this) to evaluate the potential effectiveness of an activated 
carbon system to remove mercury from the acid plant tail gas. GCT’s conclusion was that even 
an optimized activated carbon system was likely to achieve only a removal efficiency of 50 to 
75%. See GCT Mercury Analysis at Attachment I. 
In addition, a tail gas mercury removal system poses significant material of construction 
and reliability problems. Condensation of the tail gas results in an acidic condensate that can 
corrode duct work, the baghouse, and the ID fan as well as blinding the filter bags and impeding 
flow. These conditions reduce system reliability, increase maintenance costs, and ultimately 
adversely impact mercury removal. 
As discussed by GCT, management of the acidic gas causes 
increased production costs associated with more expensive materials of construction and the 
addition of a gas treatment system. 
In summary, activated carbon injection with 
a polishing 
baghouse on the acid tail gas is not a proven technology in this application, and engineering 
analysis suggests this technology would result in poor mercury removal efficiency, poor reliability, 
and excessive maintenance costs. 
Please see the GCT Analysis of the Cost and Feasibility of 
Possible Control Strategies for Mercury Emissions from the Tail Gas Scrubber Vent included as 
Attachment 
I for additional discussion of these issues. 
Cc. 
Additional controls of mercury on the acid tail gas are not justified when cost 
and feasibility are considered under the BTF MACT standard. 
An activated carbon system will be much more expensive than EPA has estimated, and will 
have 
a much higher cost effectiveness per pound of mercury removed. FMMI’s analysis of 
activated carbon control of mercury emissions from the acid plant tail gas demonstrates that (i) 
this technology is unlikely to meet the efficiency assumptions supporting the proposed NESHAP 
revisions (resulting in fewer pounds of mercury removed), and (ii) both capital costs and operating 
14

costs for the proposed emission controls far exceed the estimates in EPA’s analysis. Specifically, 
the capital cost to install an activated carbon system to remove mercury from the acid plant tail 
gas would equal $16,450,000. Combined with expected operating costs, the activated carbon 
system is expected to have an annualized cost of $4,432,000. 
Moreover, it is very unlikely that 
the activated carbon system could achieve the proposed 90% mercury removal rate given the 
process conditions and the very low inlet mercury concentrations. Assuming a more realistic 50- 
75% removal efficiency, the cost effectiveness value 
is $202,600 
to $303,900 per pound of 
mercury removed. 
These values are close to an order of magnitude higher than the EPA’s cost 
effectiveness threshold of $27,500 per pound. 
Even if the system is capable of a 90% removal rate (which for the reasons set out above 
is unlikely), the cost effectiveness value would be $168,800 per pound of mercury removed. See 
GCT Mercury Analysis at Attachment I. Even this value based on an unrealistic control efficiency 
is more than 6 times higher than the acceptable cost of control for mercury. 
Moreover, it is higher 
than the cost effectiveness determinations in other recent NESHAP decisions where additional 
mercury 
controls 
were 
considered 
not 
cost 
effective. 
See 
e.g., 
Integrated 
Iron 
& 
Steel 
Manufacturing NESHAP ($136,000 per Ibs. of Hg not cost effective) (84 Fed. Reg. 42704, 42732 
(Aug. 16, 2019)); Ferroalloys — SiMn Production ($109,000 per Ibs. of Hg not cost effective) (79 
Fed. Reg. 60238, 60263 (Oct. 6, 2014)); Gold Mine Ore Processing ($100,000 per Ibs. of Hg not 
cost effective) (75 Fed. Reg. 22470, 22483 (Apr. 28, 2010)). 
GCT also considered other potential mercury removal technologies. For example, GCT 
evaluated the application of the Boliden Norzink process (“BN Process”). 
Based on GCT’s 
analysis, the BN Process (like activated carbon) performs poorly at low mercury concentrations 
with estimated removal efficiencies of 50 to 85%. The cost of control, even assuming an unlikely 
90% removal efficiency, would be $148,000 per pound of mercury removed. 
Other mercury 
control technologies considered by GCT were incompatible with the acid plant tail gas process 
conditions 
and/or 
had 
insufficient 
control 
efficiencies 
at 
the 
already 
low 
inlet 
mercury 
concentrations present in the acid plant tail gas. See GCT Mercury Analysis at Attachment I. 
In summary, a cost-effective technology that is capable of removing 90% of the mercury 
in the acid plant tail gas simply does not exist, and as a result, EPA’s proposed mercury controls 
are not justifiable as additional beyond the floor controls. 
Dz. 
EPA’s calculation of mercury MACT floor does not include all of the relevant 
mercury emissions data and underreports the UPL. 
EPA’s calculation of the MACT floor for mercury is based upon a very small dataset 
collected using a sampling methodology that did not include the complete EPA Method 29 trains 
designed to capture mercury emissions (only one potassium permanganate impinger was used). 
Thus, the sample results likely under-report mercury emissions to some unknown degree resulting 
in an artificially low UPL. Moreover, additional sample runs at the FMMI facility are available for 
2020 and 2021 (albeit with the incomplete permanganate trains) that were not included in EPA’s 
15

UPL analysis, but nevertheless show substantially more variability in the acid plant tail gas.° For 
these reasons, the current data set is not sufficiently robust without additional validation to support 
the creation of a MACT floor. 
EPA calculated the MACT floor emission limit for facility-wide mercury emissions using 
a very limited test data set for the FMMI and Asarco facilities. Specifically, Appendix A of EPA’s 
MACT floor memorandum!” lists total facility mercury data for just five test runs, two for Asarco 
in 2019 (sum of five sampling locations) and three for FMMI in 2018 (sum of all three stacks 
tested). FMMI subsequently conducted additional tests in 2020 and 2021 in which all three stacks 
were tested, producing six additional test runs for total facility emissions. The 2020 (previously 
provided to EPA) and 2021 test reports are provided as appendices to Attachment J. Adding these 
results to EPA’s data set results in a slightly more robust data set (11 test runs, still statistically 
small) and would raise the UPL by 80%, from 0.01 
(as reported by EPA in the MACT floor 
memorandum) to 0.018 lb/hr. This clearly demonstrates that the limited data set used by EPA to 
establish the proposed facility-wide mercury emissions limit 
is too limited 
to represent an 
achievable MACT floor emission limit. Additional details are provided in Ramboll’s analysis of 
the Limitations of the EPA Data Set for Calculating a MACT Floor for Mercury included as 
Attachment J. 
FMMI did not measure mercury emissions to demonstrate performance relative to any 
established mercury emissions limits. Instead, the test was designed for compliance testing for 
lead. Testing for other metals, including mercury, was included for emissions estimating purposes. 
The tests generally followed EPA Method 29, but the sampling train only used one impinger 
containing potassium permanganate absorbing solution instead of the two impingers specified by 
EPA methods (see Attachment K, Method 29 Modifications for FMMI Mercury Emissions Tests). 
The potassium permanganate solution captures elemental mercury, much of which passes through 
the nitric acid/hydrogen peroxide absorbing solution in the impingers upstream. Two impingers in 
series with each absorbing solution are used to assure complete mercury capture within the sample 
train. As a result of this modification, an unknown portion of the mercury in the stack gas sample 
may not have been captured within the sampling train. Therefore, the test results, and the resultant 
UPL, are biased low by an unknown amount. Consequently, it is unlikely the facility-wide mercury 
emission limit could be achieved when the full Method 29 sampling train is used with the same 
degree of confidence and coverage assumed when calculating the UPL. Additional details are 
provided in Attachment K. 
For these reasons, the data set upon which the UPL is based is insufficient to support the 
calculated MACT 
floor, and additional 
testing and analysis 
of the fluctuations 
in mercury 
emissions is necessary before a representative MACT floor can be determined. 
° Additional uncertainty in the data set comes from known fluctuations 
in the mercury content of the copper 
concentrate. As acknowledged by EPA in the preamble, mercury emissions are largely driven by the mercury content 
in concentrate and other feedstocks. See 87 Fed. Reg. 1636. This means not only that mercury levels can differ from 
facility to facility but also for the same facility over time, as these facilities each use ore from multiple mines, and the 
ore composition at a given mine can fluctuate over time as different sections of the orebody are mined. 
'0“M{ACT Floor Analysis for the Primary Copper Smelting Source Category,” Docket ID EPA-HQ-OAR-2020-0430- 
0055. 
16

IV. 
Many of the proposed new work practice standards have no application to operations 
at the FMMI smelter and are unlikely to improve control of metal HAPs. 
The new work practice standards addressing fugitive dust sources included in the Proposed 
NESHAP Revisions (40 CFR §§ 63.1445(b)(1) and (7) & 63.1445(e)) were taken from the 2015 
Asarco Consent Decree. These specific provisions were negotiated between that facility and 
ADEQ for control of dust emissions 
at that particular facility. FMMI and Asarco smelting 
operations are not configured identically. For example, FMMI feed materials are delivered directly 
to covered storage areas and transferred primarily by conveyor belt directly into bins that feed the 
smelter. In the infrequent event that in-plant haulage of concentrates does occur, a large end dump 
truck is utilized to efficiently move feed materials 
in fewer loads. As 
a result, tarping these 
infrequent in-plant transfers is both impractical and unsafe. Further, the speed limit requirements 
are overly prescriptive and do not account for the variability in the type and frequency of traffic 
on particular roads. Similarly, there is no indication that daily sweeping or 6-week applications of 
chemical dust suppressants is necessary at the FMMI facility. Proposed 40 CFR § 63.1445(b)(7) 
is simply overly prescriptive and does not adequately compensate for significant differences 
between how the different smelters manage feedstocks and other solid materials. 
The management of fugitive dust sources of the type addressed by these work practice 
standards depend on how feedstocks are stored, the type of loading and unloading systems used, 
the layout of the facility and distances travelled, and other facility-specific details. These are site- 
specific issues that require site-specific solutions. The most efficient and effective way to address 
these fugitive dust concerns is through the site’s fugitive dust control plan that, pursuant to 
§ 
63.1445(c), must identify the control measures used to control fugitive dust emissions from each 
source addressed in the plan “as applicable and appropriate for your site conditions.” Furthermore, 
pursuant to 
§ 63.1445(e), that fugitive dust control plan must be approved by the delegated 
authority every five years. FMMI therefore requests that the overly prescriptive (and duplicative) 
requirements in § 63.1445(b)(1) and (7) be eliminated, and the agency utilize the requirements of 
§ 63.1445(c) and (e) to ensure that each facility implements applicable and appropriate measures 
to control fugitive dust emissions via a site-specific fugitive dust control plan. 
V. 
Compliance demonstration, performance test methods, and operating parameter 
limit establishment. 
A. 
Performance Test Methods 
FMMI engaged Ramboll to evaluate the specific performance test methods and procedures 
set forth in the Proposed NESHAP Revisions for purposes of demonstrating compliance with new 
emissions limits. Testing the vent streams addressed by these revisions will create unique 
challenges. For example, as noted above, the anode baghouse must be analyzed as a combined 
process stream at the aisle scrubber, but data collection of the inputs to the combined gas stream 
assessment process under 40 CFR § 63.1446 will be a challenge. Similarly, it is not possible to 
collect test data from the roofline vents using EPA Methods 
1, 2/2F/2G, 3/3A/3B, 4 and 5D (or 
listed alternatives) as proposed by EPA. For this reason, FMMI utilized a sampling methodology 
and test protocol negotiated with the Arizona Department of Environmental Quality (*ADEQ”) 
specific 
to 
this unique situation when measuring emissions 
exiting roofline vents. FMMI 
recognizes that the proposed NESHAP revisions contain provisions for the use of alternate 
17

methods (see e.g., 
§ 63.1450(a)(2)). In this instance, “alternate” methods are the only option 
because those methods in the proposal are technically infeasible and FMMI stresses that the only 
way to provide regulatory certainty and facilitate compliance assurance is if an alternate, and 
realistic, test method 
is developed as part of the NESHAP rule revisions. Moreover, FMMI 
believes that the appropriate test method for the roofline vents should be based on the existing 
methodology developed with ADEQ. Importantly, this is the same methodology that generated the 
emissions data upon which the rule revisions are based. 
Additional discussion of these issues, 
including 
a preliminary outline of a proposed test methodology, 
is contained in the Ramboll 
assessment that is included as Attachment L. 
B. 
Operating Parameter Limit Establishment 
EPA’s 
November 
4, 
2021 
redline 
revisions 
include 
requirements 
at 
40 
CFR 
§ 
63.1450(d)(3) for the establishment (and re-establishment) of operating parameter limits for 
mercury emission control devices during each performance test based on the lowest or highest 
hourly average value of the relevant parameter measured in any of the three hour-long test runs. 
While the prescribed approach for establishing operating parameter limits is modeled after existing 
language in Subpart QQQ for establishing operating parameter limits for venturi wet scrubbers 
and other control devices 
for particulate matter, 
the approach for such control devices 
is 
fundamentally flawed because it does not allow for the establishment of a limit (range or maximum 
or minimum value) that reflects the designed and expected range of operating parameter values 
that are indicative of proper control device operation and performance. 
Because the current approach requires the operating parameter limit to be set at an hourly 
average value (even if the lowest or highest measured value during 
a performance test), the 
operating parameter level will inherently be above or below that value approximately 50% of the 
time the control device is operating. As a result, maintaining the operating parameter value above 
or below an hourly average limit established during a single performance test is not necessarily a 
representative and reliable indicator of the control device’s operation and performance. 
For 
example, consider a scrubber with 
a manufacturer’s recommended operating specification for 
pressure drop between 3.0 in. WC and 6.0 in. WC. Further consider that hourly average pressure 
drop values measured during each run of a performance test were relatively consistent at 4.5 in. 
WC, 4.6 in. WC, and 4.7 
in. WC. 
If the lowest measured hourly average was selected, the 
operating parameter limit for pressure drop would be no lower than 4.5 in. WC. 
As a result, 
subsequent 
operations 
at 
hourly average pressure 
drop 
values 
within 
the manufacturer’s 
recommended 
operating 
range, 
but 
below 
the 
4.5 
in. WC 
limit, 
would 
be 
considered 
noncompliance. 
Similarly, the scrubber could be operating in compliance with the operating 
parameter limit 
(i.e., no lower than 4.5 
in. WC), but 
at levels above 
the manufacturer’s 
recommended 
operating 
range 
that 
could 
be 
reflective 
of operational problems 
or 
poor 
performance of the scrubber. Accordingly, the overly simplistic and rigid approach to establishing 
operating parameter limits based solely on hourly average values measured during 
a single 
performance test does not adequately account for the expected range of pressure drop values under 
a control device’s design. 
FMMI therefore requests that EPA revise the Subpart QQQ requirements for establishing 
operating parameter limits for venturi scrubbers and other control devices to allow for other 
information to be considered in the selection of a limit (a range or single maximum or minimum 
18

value) that is indicative of proper operation and performance of the control device. This approach 
has been adopted under other NESHAP regulations (see e.g., 40 CFR § 63.1366(b)(3)(ii)(B) under 
Subpart MMM) where performance test data is supplemented by engineering assessments and/or 
manufacturer’s recommendations. 
Similar to the existing Subpart QQQ provisions for selecting 
operating parameters 
“as appropriate 
for 
the 
control 
device design, 
that 
can 
be 
used 
as 
representative and reliable indicators 
of the control device operation,” the selection of the 
associated operating parameter limit could require written documentation to support the selection. 
Such documentation could include manufacturer’s specifications 
or recommendations, EPA 
technical guidance, generally available air pollution control engineering manuals, source-specific 
engineering assessments, and/or observations of operating parameter values measured via a series 
of performance tests. This approach would be similar to the criteria for designing an appropriate 
range 
or designated 
condition 
for 
a selected performance indicator under the Compliance 
Assurance Monitoring Rule at 40 CFR § 64.3(a)(3) and would allow for the selection of a more 
representative single maximum or minimum value (e.g., minimum scrubber liquid flow rate) or a 
range (€.g., minimum to maximum pressure drop across a scrubber) as appropriate. 
Suggested revisions to the requirements for establishing operating parameter limits for 
venturi wet scrubbers and other control devices at 40 CFR §§ 63.1450(a)(4) and 63.1450(a)(5) are 
provided in Table 
1 
for EPA’s consideration. Suggested conforming revisions to reflect these 
changes are also provided for the associated provisions at 40 C.F.R. §§ 63.1444(g), 63.1444(h), 
63.1446(d), 63.1446(e), 63.1450(e)(4) and 
(5), 63.1451(g), 63.1451(k)(3), 63.1453(a)(1)(ii), 
63.1453(d)(1), and 63.1453(e)(1). 
Note that for purposes of supporting 
a selected operating 
parameter limit, the CAM Rule (at 40 C.F.R. 
§ 64.3(c)(1)) states that “[e]mission testing is not 
required to be conducted over the entire indicator range or range of potential emissions.” Similar 
language is provided under the NESHAP Subpart MMM example referenced above at 40 CFR § 
63.1336(b)(3)(i)(B). Furthermore, the CAM Rule recognizes that performance testing may be 
unnecessary where an indicator range is appropriately based on engineering assessments or other 
data (see 40 C.F.R. § 64.3(d)(2)). This understanding is incorporated in the suggested revisions for 
EPA’s consideration. 
Finally, there are a number of other ambiguities and practical impediments to the Proposed 
NESHAP 
Revisions addressing compliance demonstration 
and 
related 
issues. 
FMMI has 
addressed these issues in Table | (attached) including suggested regulatory language to resolve the 
particular issue. 
VI. 
— EPA’s comparison of the anticipated cost of the proposed NESHAP revisions to the 
revenues of FMMI’s ultimate parent FCX is inapposite, and does not provide any 
meaningful information on the economic impact of the revisions on FMMI. 
As is explained at the beginning of this letter, FCX is FMMI’s ultimate parent company 
with other subsidiaries operating copper and molybdenum mines, copper smelters and refineries, 
and other processing facilities throughout the world. FMMI accounts for only a modest part of 
both the value and the revenues of the much larger FCX group of companies. 
To assess the 
economic impact of the proposed NESHAP revisions on FMMI’s business and ability to continue 
to operate—the cost of the revisions must be measured against FMMI’s economic and other 
performance metrics. FMMI’s continued operation depends on its individual performance—not 
the revenues of its parent from other operations. EPA’s assumption that “parent companies [will] 
19

shift resources across their operations to address regulatory compliance needs” does not reflect 
modern business decision making. See 87 Fed. Reg. 1651 (essentially arguing the parents will 
subsidize underperforming subsidiaries). 
FMMI is not a publicly traded company and does not have publicly available audited 
financial statements. Nevertheless, there is no doubt that the proposed NESHAP revisions will 
cause significant financial challenges for FMMI. As discussed above, EPA’s cost estimates 
uniformly underestimate the expected cost of compliance. The ultimate outcome, of course, 
depends on the final provisions of the revised NESHAP, but to suggest that this rule has only minor 
economic consequences for FMM1I is plainly incorrect. Indeed, if it becomes uneconomical for 
FMMI to process copper concentrates and the facility shuts down, then the United States would 
be nearly completely dependent on non-domestic copper smelting capacity. Nearly all of the 
smelting production of this critical metal would be overseas. Moreover, copper concentrates from 
the U.S. mines would then likely be sent overseas with the associated increase in transportation 
related carbon dioxide and other emissions. 
VII. 
Enforcement discretion 
for malfunction 
events 
following removal 
of the SSM 
exemption in Sections 63.6(f)(1) and 63.6(h)(1) 
FMMI believes that EPA should include in the rule itself the conditions under which it 
would exercise its enforcement discretion in response to malfunctions. 
It is true that judicial 
precedents 
and 
the Agency’s 
policies 
prohibit automatic 
or discretionary exemptions 
and 
affirmative defenses in section 112 standards. See, e.g., NRDC v. EPA, 749 F.3d 1055 (D.C. Cir. 
2014); Sierra Club 
v, EPA, 551 F.3d 1019 (D.C. Cir. 2008). See also, “EPA’s SSM Policy 
Applicable to SIPs,” 80 Fed. Reg. 33840 (June 12, 2015) (“2015 SSM Policy”). Nevertheless, the 
2015 SSM Policy expressly allows state implementation plans (“SIPs”) to include regulatory 
provisions describing the circumstances under which a state will exercise enforcement discretion 
to address noncompliance. See 
80 Fed. Reg. 
at 33981. Because SIPs are state rules, these 
enforcement discretion provisions may apply only to the exercise of enforcement discretion by the 
state, and cannot purport to bind the exercise of enforcement discretion by EPA or citizen 
plaintiffs. See id. 
Courts have approved 
a similar formulation 
in section 
112 rules under which EPA 
announced that its own enforcement discretion would be exercised in consideration of various 
factors. See, e.g., United States Sugar Corp. 
v. EPA, 830 F.3d 579, 607-608 (D.C. Cir. 2016) 
(accepting EPA’s statement in the preamble to the major boilers rule as to how it would exercise 
case-by-case 
enforcement 
discretion 
in 
a 
way 
that 
would 
not 
prohibit 
citizen 
plaintiff 
enforcement). In the present proceeding, EPA reiterated its enforcement discretion policy in the 
preamble to the proposed rule. 
In the unlikely event that a source fails to comply with the applicable CAA section 
112(d) standards as a result of a malfunction event, the EPA would determine an 
appropriate response based on, among other things, the good faith efforts of the 
source to minimize emissions during malfunction periods, including preventative 
and corrective actions, as well as root cause analyses to ascertain and rectify excess 
emissions. The EPA would also consider whether the source's failure to comply 
with 
the CAA section 
112(d) 
standard was, 
in 
fact, 
sudden, 
infrequent, 
not 
20

reasonably preventable, and was not instead caused, in part, by poor maintenance 
or careless operation. 40 CFR 63.2 (Definition of malfunction). 
87 Fed. Reg. 1616, 1647 (Jan. 11, 2022). 
FMMI recommends that EPA blend the approaches from its 2015 SSM Policy and its past 
section 112 rulemaking practice, and include enforcement discretion conditions in the final rule 
text 
itself. Especially given that the proposal replaces the requirement to prepare 
a written 
malfunction response plan with a fairly generic good air pollution control practices provision in 
proposed section 63.1447(a), FMMI believes 
that articulating EPA enforcement discretion 
conditions in the rule itself will result in a more informed facility-level response in case of a 
malfunction. The following elements from the 2015 SSM Policy could be included in the final rule 
as factors EPA would consider in exercising its enforcement discretion: 
(1) To the maximum extent practicable the 
air pollution control equipment, process 
equipment or processes were maintained and operated in a manner consistent with good 
practice for minimizing emissions. 
(2) Repairs were made in an expeditious fashion when the operator knew or should have 
known that applicable emission limitations were being exceeded. Off-shift labor and 
overtime were utilized, to the extent practicable, to ensure that such repairs were made as 
expeditiously as practicable. 
(3) The amount and duration of the excess emissions (including any bypass) were 
minimized to the maximum extent practicable during periods of such emissions. 
(4) All possible steps were taken to minimize the impact of the excess emissions on ambient 
air quality. 
(5) The excess emissions are not part of a recurring pattern indicative of inadequate design, 
operation or maintenance. 
Alternatively, FMMI requests that EPA include this more detailed statement of how it 
would exercise its enforcement discretion in the preamble to the final rule. 
VIII. 
FMMI responses for miscellaneous areas where EPA has requested comments 
A. 
An additional opacity limit or lead limit on the roofline vents is not necessary. 
As part of EPA’s discussion regarding emission limits on process fugitive emissions 
exiting the roofline vents, the agency solicited comments on whether opacity limits should also be 
included as part of the MACT floor. See 87 Fed. Reg. 1634. FMMI agrees with EPA’s conclusion 
that additional opacity limits are unnecessary. The addition of opacity limits will not result in the 
reduction of facility emissions, and will not impact the risk analysis that is driving the agency’s 
RTR analysis. As noted above, the off-site ambient monitoring data for lead demonstrates that the 
FMMI facility does a good job of consistently managing its metal HAP emissions. Process fugitive 
emissions will be adequately controlled for metal HAPs via fPM limits. 
21

EPA’s November 4, 2021 
redline revisions also suggested opacity 
as 
a site-specific 
operating parameter limit for roof vents. 
As explained in Table 1, operating parameter limits are 
not appropriate for the smelter building roofline vents because they are not control devices or the 
underlying affected sources. Roof vents (i.e., emission points) do not warrant the establishment of 
operating parameter limits and associated operating parameter monitoring as specified for control 
devices to provide a reasonable assurance that the control device is being operated and maintained 
properly 
(i.e., 
limits 
that 
are “representative and 
reliable indicators 
of the control 
device 
performance”). As proposed by FMML, site-specific operating parameter limits on control devices 
used to control process fugitive emissions that otherwise might escape the smelter building roofline 
vents would be required. 
EPA also solicited comments regarding whether 
a lead limit should be added to (or 
substituted for) the fPM limit on the roofline vents. See 87 Fed. Reg. 1635. Again, FMMI agrees 
with EPA’s conclusion that {PM is the most appropriate surrogate for metal HAPs in this service. 
For reasons that are similar to the opacity discussion above, there is no justification for adding an 
additional control parameter when fPM is adequate. 
B. 
Beyond-the-floor 
controls 
on 
the anode 
refining 
point 
sources 
are 
not 
necessary. 
FMMI agrees with EPA’s conclusion that beyond-the-floor reductions in metal HAPs are 
not cost effective and should not be included in the NESHAP rule revisions. 
See 87 Fed. Reg. 
1633. These emissions are already controlled with a state-of-the-art baghouse. 
Additional fPM 
controls would be extremely expensive and result in only very minimal emissions reductions. As 
EPA has indicated in the preamble, the cost effectiveness of additional {PM controls (estimated at 
$8.7 million per ton of metal HAP reduced) is at least two orders of magnitude higher than prior 
thresholds for cost effectiveness for this type of pollutant. 
CG 
Additional controls for {PM on the aisle scrubber are not necessary under an 
ample margin of safety analysis. 
EPA solicited comments regarding whether additional metal HAP reductions to the aisle 
scrubber were justified under an ample margin of safety analysis. See 87 Fed. Reg. 1643. FMMI 
agrees with EPA’s conclusion that additional metal HAP limits on the aisle scrubber are not 
necessary. 
As set out above, FMMI proposes that the aisle scrubber would be subject to 
a 
concentration-based fPM limit of 23 mg/dscm similar to other vents processing emissions from 
the vessels managing molten material. Moreover, existing MACT floor emissions from the aisle 
scrubber do not significantly contribute to the estimated risks from metal HAPs. 
As the agency 
found, any PM control on the aisle scrubber would result 
in “high estimated capital costs, 
uncertainties, and moderate risk reductions.” Jd. Accordingly, FMMI does not believe that 
additional {PM limitations on the aisle scrubber beyond the 23 mg/dscm are necessary or 
appropriate. 
22

FMMI appreciates the opportunity to comment on the proposed revisions to the primary 
copper smelting NESHAP and welcomes any opportunity to discuss these comments with the 
agency as appropriate. If you have any questions or need additional information, please feel free 
to contact Bryce Mares (bmares@fini.com or (928)473-7060) or Julie Lishner (jlishner@fmi.com 
or (928)473-7556) at your convenience. 
Sincerely yours. 
bon 
Miguel Palacios 
Vice-President — North American Smelting and Refining, 
Freeport-McMoRan Rod and Refining 
General Manager, Freeport-McMoRan Miami Inc. 
23
