
--- COMMENT ID: FEMA-2024-0029-0069 AND DOCKET ID: FEMA-2024-0029 ---
Insurance Institute for Business & Home Safety     
January 27, 2025 
Robert Pesapane 
Division Director 
Public Assistance Division 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
500 C St SW 
Washington, DC 20024 
  
Re: Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy, FEMA Interim Policy FP-
104-24-002 
Dear Director Pesapane, 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on FEMA’s Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share 
Incentives Interim Policy, authorized by the provisions in the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018. 
Increasing the federal cost share for public assistance grants is an important incentive to 
encourage pre-disaster mitigation. 
Making the interim policy more consistent with the text and intent of the Bipartisan Budget Act 
of 2018 will strengthen FEMA’s approach and help position communities to be as prepared as 
possible to withstand and recover from natural disasters. Specifically, in addition to incentivizing 
PA-eligible applicants’ post-disaster rebuilding plans that include mitigation activities with an 
increased federal cost share, we strongly urge FEMA to also incentivize pre-disaster investments 
in mitigation made by PA-eligible applicants. 
At a time when the bill for natural disasters is rising, increasing the federal cost share ought only 
be increased judiciously and with a clear goal in mind. The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 
provides an explicit goal: increasing pre-disaster resilience investments by State, Local, Tribal, 
and Territorial (SLTT) governments. The Interim Policy sidesteps this goal, but the changes 
outlined below could bring it back into compliance with the statute and common sense. 
INCENTIVIZE PRE-DISASTER INVESTMENTS 
The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 authorized FEMA to provide incentives for pre-disaster 
investments in mitigation made by state and tribal governments with an increased federal cost 
share. The purpose of this provision was to encourage PA-eligible applicants to make appropriate 
investments to proactively prepare their communities to withstand and recover from natural 
disasters. This goal is not only worthwhile but achievable, given the number of communities that 
have invested state, local, and private funds to increase their communities’ resilience to severe 
weather like hurricanes, tornados, hailstorms, and wildfires. For example, seven states have or 
soon will invest millions of dollars into FORTIFIED state grant programs, which provide 
homeowners with $10,000 grants to upgrade their roofs to a more resilient option that can better 
withstand high wind events. 

 
Insurance Institute for Business & Home Safety     
 
2 
The formula to incentivize pre-disaster investments by SLTT governments and nonprofits need 
not be complicated; indeed, the policy will benefit from simplicity. 
The following formula would provide a simple approach to incentivize pre-disaster investments 
by these entities: 
• 
5 percent federal cost share increase for adopting and enforcing modern building codes 
and completing an eligible hazard mitigation proposal for a PA Permanent Work project. 
• 
5 percent federal cost share increase for pre-disaster investments in mitigation. As 
outlined in the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, eligible investments include:  
• 
disaster relief 
• 
insurance 
• 
facilitating participation in the community rating system 
• 
funding mitigation projects 
• 
granting tax incentives for projects that reduce risk  
• 
10 percent federal cost share increase for both.  
By incentivizing pre-disaster investments in mitigation made by SLTT governments and 
nonprofits as well as post-disaster federal spending that include mitigation activities with an 
increased federal cost share, FEMA’s PA program can more comprehensively incentivize actions 
communities take to become more resilient to natural hazards. 
SET PRE-DISASTER INVESTMENTS THRESHOLDS BASED ON THE 10-YEAR 
AVERAGE PA GRANT AWARD AND APPLICANT TYPE 
FEMA should use a simple formula to determine whether a SLTT government or nonprofit has 
made sufficient pre-disaster investments to qualify for the 5 percent federal cost share increase. 
These thresholds—which can differ based on the PA-eligible applicant—should be set by using 
the average PA grant awarded over the last 10 years, with a sliding scale based on the type of 
PA-eligible applicant. Specifically, we suggest: 
• 
State governments can receive a 5 percent federal cost share increase for pre-disaster 
investments in mitigation when those investments amount to at least 10 percent of the 
average PA grant awarded over the last 10 years. 
• 
Local, tribal, and territorial governments can receive a 5 percent federal cost share 
increase for pre-disaster investments in mitigation when those investments amount to at 
least 5 percent of the average PA grant awarded over the last 10 years. 
• 
Eligible private nonprofit organizations can receive a 5 percent federal cost share 
increase for pre-disaster investments in mitigation when those investments amount to at 
least 2.5 percent of the average PA grant awarded over the last 10 years.  
This sliding scale is simple, clear and fair.   
 
*                *                * 

 
Insurance Institute for Business & Home Safety     
 
3 
The PA program helps communities to rebuild and recover following natural disasters. With the 
enactment of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, Congress gave FEMA authority to reward PA-
eligible applicants that have made proactive investments to ensure their communities are best 
prepared to withstand and recover from natural hazards with an increased federal cost share.  It is 
in the nation’s and taxpayers’ best interests for FEMA to closely follow the letter and spirit of 
the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 law and incentivize pre-disaster investments in mitigation 
made by PA-eligible applicants with an increased federal cost share. 
Thank you for your consideration. Please reach out to Michael Newman, IBHS’s General 
Counsel, at mnewman@ibhs.org with follow-up questions. 
ABOUT IBHS 
The Insurance Institute for Business and Home Safety (IBHS) is a 501(c)(3) organization 
enabled by the property insurance industry’s investment to fund building safety research that 
leads to real-world solutions for home and business owners, helping to create more resilient 
communities.  
Severe weather disrupts lives, displaces families, and drives financial loss. IBHS delivers top-tier 
science and translates it into action so we can prevent avoidable suffering, strengthen our homes 
and businesses, inform the insurance industry, and support thriving communities. The perils we 
study at IBHS are part of the natural world in which we live, but social and economic disasters 
occur when these perils meet human populations that live or work in harm’s way. To break the 
cycle of destruction, it is essential to address all aspects of the building performance chain: 
where you build, how you design and construct, and how well you maintain and repair. As a 
building science institute, IBHS focuses on the ways that weather behaves, what makes homes 
and businesses vulnerable, and how our buildings can be more resilient. We exist to help ensure 
that the spaces where people live, learn, work, worship, and gather are safe, stable, and as strong 
as the best science can equip them to be.  
One of the ways we translate our science into action is through FORTIFIED™, a voluntary 
construction and re-roofing program designed to strengthen homes and commercial buildings 
against specific types of severe weather such as high winds, hail, hurricanes, and even tornadoes. 
Based on decades of lab- and field-based research, FORTIFIED is available for single-family, 
multifamily, and commercial structures.  
Another way we translate our science into action is through Wildfire Prepared, a voluntary 
designation program designed to reduce the risk of home ignition. The program incorporates a 
set of critical mitigation actions that, when undertaken collectively, can meaningfully reduce the 
risk of a home igniting from embers and radiant heat. Mitigations include actions like installing a 
Class A fire rated roof; creating five feet of defensible space – the first five feet surrounding a 
home where combustible material is reduced; and installing ember resistant vents. While 
Wildfire Prepared is currently only available in California and Oregon, we expect to make the 
program available in other wildfire-prone states. 
 

 
Insurance Institute for Business & Home Safety     
 
4 
Sincerely,  
 
 
 
Michael Newman 
General Counsel 
Insurance Institute for Business & Home Safety

--- COMMENT ID: FEMA-2024-0029-0077 AND DOCKET ID: FEMA-2024-0029 ---
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
 
 
January 29, 2025 
Robert Pesapane 
Director, Public Assistance Division 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
  
RE: FEMA-2024-0029, Request for Comment on the Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives 
Policy 
 
Dear Mr. Pesapane,  
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on FEMA’s newly published interim Public Assistance 
Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy. The Nature Conservancy (TNC) recognizes the role this program 
plays in incentivizing communities to enhance their resilience to natural hazards. We see significant 
opportunity to improve the policy to effectively promote pre-disaster mitigation efforts and support 
access to financial incentives by all communities. We appreciate the opportunity to submit comments.  
TNC is a global conservation organization dedicated to conserving the lands and waters on which all life 
depends. Guided by science, we create innovative, on-the-ground solutions to the world’s toughest 
challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. We are working to conserve lands, waters, and 
oceans at unprecedented scale 
 
Working in all 50 states and the U.S. territories, we use a collaborative approach that engages local 
communities, governments, the private sector, and landowners. TNC works with federal, regional, state 
and local entities to enable hazard mitigation. We work collaboratively with a range of stakeholders, 
conduct science that informs and guides this work, and work with communities and others to implement 
nature-based infrastructure investments with the goal of increasing resilience and delivering biodiversity 
and other environmental, social, and economic benefits.  
 
The following sections lay out our understanding of the relevant history and background on the interim 
Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy and our recommendations to improve the new 
initiative to better incent effective pre-disaster mitigation measures. 
 
Background 
FEMA’s Public Assistance (PA) program is the primary means through which the agency obligates funding 
for disaster response and recovery. Between 2000 and 2020, more than half of the $110 billion obligated 
out of the Disaster Relief Fund (DRF) flowed through PA.1 As the scale of disasters has increased through 
time, TNC has appreciated the attention FEMA and Congress have given to reducing risk through pre- 
and post-disaster mitigation efforts. Pre-disaster mitigation is critical to lessen the impact of natural 
 
1 Congressional Research Service. (2021). FEMA’s Public Assistance Program: A Primer and Considerations for 
Congress. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R46749  

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
2 
 
hazards before they strike, while post-disaster mitigation offers an important pathway for community 
recovery efforts that focus on building resilience to future events.  
TNC supports FEMA’s existing regulations and policies that enable post-disaster hazard mitigation efforts 
as a part of PA funding. While impacted communities are often focused on rebuilding back to a pre-
disaster state, recovery efforts offer a critical opportunity to adopt adaptation measures that can help 
avoid repeated damages from future events. FEMA will generally fund PA Permanent Work projects that 
rebuild infrastructure to a more resilient standard to comply with minimum requirements of state or 
local codes. The agency’s rule to implement the Federal Flood Risk Management Standard provides 
additional requirements when addressing disaster damages, requiring applicants to design 
reconstruction to more forward-looking flood standards in an attempt to avoid repetitive economic 
losses. FEMA also allows excess PA funds (i.e., those funds remaining from PA projects with an actual 
replacement cost lower than the estimated cost) to be used for certain mitigation actions, including for 
undamaged facilities that are nonetheless vulnerable to future hazards.2 
Most notably, FEMA permits PA applicants to request funding above and beyond the repair or 
replacement cost of damaged facilities to help fund cost-effective mitigation measures for PA Permanent 
Work projects. These so-called “406-mitigation” projects can include measures like adding flood barriers 
as part of the repair or reconstruction of damaged facilities. The agency allows applicants to use any of 
three different methods to demonstrate cost-effectiveness: 1) keeping mitigation expenses below 15% of 
the replacement cost; 2) selecting from a number of pre-approved mitigation measures that are eligible 
for funding up to 100% of the project’s replacement cost; or 3) completing a Benefit-Cost Analysis 
(BCA).3 Applicants are still required to cover the non-federal PA cost share—typically 25%—for 406-
mitigation projects.  
In 2018, Congress sought to leverage the availability of billions of dollars in annual PA funding to 
encourage greater investment in disaster preparedness by states, tribes, and territories (STTs, see note 
related to inclusion of territories).4 At its core, PA is a source of response and recovery funds that 
includes some limited opportunities for mitigation (as described above). Yet Congress chose not to retool 
the post-disaster mitigation opportunities under the program, instead opting to leverage PA funding to 
create a new incentive for pre-disaster work. Congress enacted the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 (BBA) 
with language that granted FEMA broad authority to raise the federal cost share for PA Permanent Work 
projects from 75% to as high as 85% for those STTs that had taken meaningful steps to invest in 
 
2 Federal Emergency Management Agency. (2025). Public Assistance Program and Policy Guide. 
https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_pa_pappg-v5.0_012025.pdf  
3 Federal Emergency Management Agency. (2025). Public Assistance Program and Policy Guide. 
https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_pa_pappg-v5.0_012025.pdf  
4 The new authority in the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 only explicitly references raising the federal cost share 
only for states and tribes. However, Stafford Act Section 406(b)(1) requires the President to cover “not less than” 
75% of the costs of PA Permanent Work projects, implying broad authority to increase the federal cost share on a 
discretionary basis (an implied power that has been used repeatedly through time). We urge FEMA to implement 
Section 406(b)(3) by offering the same incentives to territorial governments in addition to states and tribes. 

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
3 
 
“measures that increase readiness for, and resilience from, a major disaster.”5 The move by Congress to 
use FEMA’s principal response and recovery account to promote pre-disaster mitigation was a clear 
statement about the urgent need for a greater level of STT-led adaptation effort before disasters strike. 
The logic behind the new authority was simple, yet elegant. Deploying pre-disaster mitigation measures 
provides a significant return on investment in terms of avoided losses. STTs that invest in proactive 
resilience efforts act to measurably decrease the costs of subsequent disasters, reducing necessary 
recovery spending through PA. By granting the new authority, Congress empowered FEMA to pass these 
savings back to STTs in the form of increased federal cost share for disaster recovery dollars. With 
disaster costs for individual events increasingly totaling in the billions of dollars, a 10% reduction in non-
federal liability for certain recovery spending would create an enormous financial incentive for STTs to 
invest in pre-disaster mitigation.  
The concept of leveraging PA funding to incentivize pre-disaster work was not new when Congress took 
up the idea. FEMA itself proposed a policy with similar logic and intended outcomes (though a different 
approach) in 2016, commonly known as the Disaster Deductible.6 While the agency stopped short of 
promulgating a final rule to implement the policy, TNC broadly supported the Disaster Deductible 
concept because it created a system to recognize and reward the financial benefits from STT-led pre-
disaster mitigation efforts, including the use of highly effective nature-based solutions.7 
The following sections outline TNC’s response to FEMA’s proposed policy to implement the new 
statutory language from the BBA.  
TNC’s Comments on FEMA’s Interim Policy 
FEMA is requesting comments on the interim Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy 
(“Interim Policy”), which seeks to implement the Stafford Act amendment from the BBA.8 The Interim 
Policy fails to fully implement the new statutory authority in several critical ways. The key differences 
between the statutory authority granted to FEMA and the agency’s implementation proposal are 
summarized in the following table: 
 
 
 
5 Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, Pub. L. No.115-123, 132 Stat. 64 (2018). https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-
congress/house-bill/1892/text  
6 Establishing a deductible for FEMA’s public assistance program. (2016, January 20). Federal Register. 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2016/01/20/2016-00997/establishing-a-deductible-for-femas-public-
assistance-program  
7 The Nature Conservancy. (2017). Comment’s on Establishing a Deductible for FEMA’s Public Assistance Program. 
https://www.regulations.gov/comment/FEMA-2016-0003-0242   
8  FEMA. (2021). Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy (INTERIM). In FEMA Policy FP-104-24-002 
[Report]. https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_pa-cost-share-initiative-policy.pdf  

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
4 
 
 
Issue 
2018 BBA Authority 
FEMA’s Interim Policy 
Pre- vs. post-
disaster mitigation 
Calls for incentives for pre-
disaster efforts and clarifies 
intent by only listing examples of 
true pre-disaster mitigation 
measures  
Focuses on post-disaster 
mitigation by exclusively offering 
increased cost share for 406-
mitigation Permanent Work 
projects 
Scope narrowed 
to 406-mitigation  
Authority’s location in Stafford 
Section 406(b) clearly indicates 
elevated cost share should be 
applied broadly across PA 
Permanent Work projects for 
qualifying STTs 
Significantly reduces the scale, 
ease of access, and positive 
impact of the incentive by only 
applying the increased federal 
cost share to 406-mitigation 
projects 
Entities eligible for 
increased federal 
cost share 
Explicitly calls for the creation of 
pre-disaster mitigation 
incentives for STTs, avoiding the 
burdens and implementation 
challenges of operating at the 
community-level 
Directs cost share decisions be 
made at the applicant level as 
part of 406-mitigation projects, 
requiring FEMA to make case-by-
case determinations for each 
individual community/project 
Mitigation 
measures eligible 
for increased 
federal cost share 
Lists a diverse range of pre-
disaster mitigation measures to 
qualify, providing clarity of 
intent, flexibility for STTs, and 
opportunities to facilitate 
nature-based solutions 
Only two qualifying mitigation 
measures: the act of proposing 
certain 406-mitigation projects 
and the adoption of IBC and 
IECC codes. Limited options for 
nature-based solutions 
Access to 
incentives for 
under-resourced 
communities 
Provides a more flexible 
framework at the STT level, 
supporting more equitable 
access to program benefits 
Requires participation at the 
applicant level, creating access 
challenges for under-resourced 
communities   
 
Table: Summary of TNC’s understanding of the PA Cost Share authority from the 2018 Bipartisan Budget 
Act vs. the implementation proposal from FEMA’s Interim Policy.  
The Interim Policy dramatically reduces the scale and potential impact of the incentive envisioned by 
Congress. We acknowledge, however, that the cost share authority granted by the BBA provides 
discretionary power to FEMA and does not mandate action. Yet, by choosing to significantly minimize the 
scope of the policy, FEMA has missed a crucial opportunity to effectively promote STT-led pre-disaster 
mitigation efforts in furtherance of the agency’s mission. TNC respectfully requests specific responses 
from FEMA on the rationale behind the statutory interpretations listed in the preceding table, each of 
which we believe reduces the potential positive impact of the agency’s new authority. We discuss each 
of the items listed in the table in greater detail in the following sections. 
Pre- vs. Post-Disaster Mitigation 

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
5 
 
Post-disaster mitigation has an important role to play in avoiding repetitive economic losses. However, 
pre-disaster risk reduction is generally the preferred mode of mitigation because impacts are addressed 
before hazards strike. Such efforts help to proactively avoid loss of life and lower disaster costs. The 
return on investment from pre-disaster mitigation projects is striking and well documented; each dollar 
invested in resilience measures can save $13 in avoided economic losses and cleanup costs from future 
disasters.9 
Despite this broadly accepted fact, FEMA has chosen to utilize its new statutory authority to almost 
exclusively incentivize post-disaster mitigation. The only exception is the Interim Policy’s incentive for 
certain building code adoption, the limitations of which we discuss in the section on Access to Incentives 
for Under-Resourced Communities. The limited scope of the Interim Policy is deeply significant. We argue 
that STTs interested in pursuing proactive resilience efforts will have almost no new incentive to do so. 
The only applicants who could benefit from the Interim Policy, as written, are those actively recovering 
from disaster impacts who have the capacity to apply for difficult-to-access post-disaster mitigation 
funding (see next section for discussion of access to post-disaster mitigation resources).  
Congress, in contrast, outlined an incentive program focused on proactive mitigation work with financial 
benefits rewarded through simple means when communities need help the most. Each of the potential 
resilience measures Congress included in the statute would increase resilience before disasters strike, 
minimizing impacts overall. Such measures would also be deployed outside of a disaster recovery 
scenario when communities are not burdened by resource-intensive response and recovery efforts. In 
this vision, qualifying communities would reap the benefits of proactive resilience work in two forms: 
avoided economic losses during disasters and reduced financial burden during recovery. FEMA, in turn, 
could expect to see reduced response and recovery spending needs thanks to the STT-led pre-disaster 
mitigation efforts, potentially easing the burden on federal taxpayers despite the increased cost share.  
We urge FEMA to update the policy to better incentivize pre-disaster resilience efforts. Such a policy 
would be consistent with the agency’s own goals to encourage STT-led adaptation efforts and the clear 
intent of Congress in the BBA Stafford Act amendment.   
Scope Narrowed to 406-Mitigation 
Post-disaster PA spending accounts for the largest pot of funding FEMA obligates through the DRF. In 
turn, agency-funded Permanent Work projects constitute the majority of spending under PA. Between 
2000 and 2020, more than 57% of PA funding (totaling more than $62 billion) went to Permanent Work 
projects to repair or replace bridges, roads, utilities, and other critical public infrastructure.10 Of this 
total, FEMA reported obligating $8.5 billion for Permanent Work projects that included some element of 
406-mitigation. 
 
9 U.S. Chamber of Commerce, Allstate, & U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation. (2024). The Preparedness Payoff: 
The Economic Benefits of Investing in Climate Resilience  [Report].  
https://www.uschamber.com/assets/documents/USChamber_AllState-2024-Climate-Resiliency-Report.pdf  
10 Congressional Research Service. (2021). FEMA’s Public Assistance Program: A Primer and Considerations for 
Congress. https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R46749  

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
6 
 
The BBA granted FEMA’s new cost share authority under Section 406(b) of the Stafford Act, which speaks 
to the federal share of spending across all PA Permanent Work projects. As such, the statute gives FEMA 
clear authority to raise the federal cost share for all Permanent Work spending for those states that have 
demonstrated sufficient pre-disaster mitigation effort. Given the differences in the scale of funding 
between Permanent Work projects generally and the subset that includes 406-mitigation, the choice of 
which projects qualify for increased federal cost share has huge repercussions for the magnitude of the 
new incentive. Limiting the increased federal cost share to 406-mitigation projects vastly decreases the 
incentive for STTs to invest in pre-disaster mitigation as a result of the Interim Policy. Narrowing the 
scope in this way was one of the most significant choices FEMA made in developing the Interim Policy to 
minimize its overall impact. 
 
In addition to significantly reducing the financial incentive relative to the vision of Congress, FEMA’s 
choice to embed the new mitigation incentives within 406-mitigation introduces myriad implementation 
challenges and increased administrative burden on communities. The 406-mitigation program is rife with 
existing barriers to participation that remain unresolved by the Interim Policy. At a high level, 
communities often face significant limitations deploying mitigation measures in the immediate wake of a 
disaster due to capacity and resource constraints. More specifically, the 406-mitigation program has long 
suffered from challenges that limit community participation, including: 1) limited education about the 
opportunity amongst applicants; 2) administrative challenges with demonstrating cost-effectiveness; 3) 
other barriers relating to FEMA’s review process, including length of reviews; and 4) financial capacity to 
cover the non-federal share of project costs.11 As a result, the 406-mitigation program is generally 
considered underutilized by applicants relative to its potential. 
TNC strongly supports efforts to improve post-disaster mitigation opportunities as a critical component 
of recovery efforts. We appreciate FEMA’s intentions to the extent that the Interim Policy represents an 
attempt by the agency to increase access to 406-mitigation funding. However, while the Interim Policy 
could begin to address the financial barrier to accessing the program, the additional 5-10% of federal 
match on a project-by-project basis also may not provide sufficient relief to incentivize new 406-
mitigation proposals amongst under-resourced communities. The Interim Policy also has not addressed 
any of the other administrative barriers to 406-mitigation work that preclude participation. Each of 
these realities suggests the impact of the new incentive on uptake of 406-mitigation will likely be very 
limited, particularly amongst under-resourced communities.  
 
We urge FEMA to decouple the new cost share incentive from the 406-mitigation program and extend 
the increased cost share opportunity to all PA Permanent Work projects, as Congress intended. Doing so 
will create a much more significant financial incentive for pre-disaster mitigation and avoid hitching the 
new initiative to a program with numerous existing barriers to access. Both changes will increase 
participation and motivate more STT-led mitigation work. If implemented correctly, given the return on 
investment from such actions, we argue that offering a greater financial incentive for pre-disaster 
 
11 Office of Inspector General, Department of Homeland Security. (2021). FEMA Has Not Prioritized Compliance 
with the Disaster Mitigation Act of 2000, Hindering Its Ability to Reduce Repetitive Damages to Roads and Bridges. 
https://www.oig.dhs.gov/sites/default/files/assets/2021-07/OIG-21-43-Jul21.pdf   

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
7 
 
mitigation should not significantly increase financial strain on the agency’s resources nor recovery 
spending obligated through the DRF.  
 
Entities Eligible for Increased Federal Cost Share 
The BBA Stafford Act amendment specifically directs FEMA to encourage resilience efforts at the STT 
level (see footnote 4), which are commonly referred to as PA “recipients.” Offering incentives for pre-
disaster mitigation at the STT level presents a much simpler potential implementation pathway for FEMA 
and participants than a program like the Community Rating System (CRS), which requires the agency to 
review and credit thousands of NFIP communities. FEMA could develop broad—yet highly impactful—
categories of potential STT pre-disaster mitigation measures would be simpler to pursue and score than 
many of the more granular creditable activities under CRS. While capacity differences certainly exist 
across STTs, any limitations to participation could theoretically be simpler to address through direct 
technical assistance or other means than the challenges FEMA has faced with CRS due to the sheer 
number of participants. FEMA implicitly recognized the value of promoting adaptation efforts at the STT 
level with the design of the Disaster Deductible system, which would have similarly created pre-disaster 
mitigation incentives at that level of governance. 
Rather than focus on incentivizing mitigation work amongst PA recipients, however, the Interim Policy 
seeks to create financial incentives at the PA applicant level on a project-by-project basis. PA applicants 
can include subunits of STT governments (e.g., state agencies), but also local communities and eligible 
nonprofit organizations. The system FEMA proposes to establish will thus require case-by-case 
determinations of whether each applicant qualifies for increased cost share based on their unique pre-
disaster mitigation effort and project proposal. Though the list of eligible mitigation activities in the 
Interim Policy is extremely short, we expect the agency to add more resilience measures that can be 
deployed to earn increased cost share. However, as FEMA takes this necessary step, the process of 
determining whether applicants have fulfilled the various mitigation efforts will only grow more 
complicated to complete on a case-by-case basis. This determination will add administrative burden to 
both the agency and applicants in the midst of broader disaster response and recovery efforts, when 
capacity is at its lowest. 
We urge the agency to update the Interim Policy to focus on mitigation incentives at the PA recipient 
level. (Importantly, as discussed in the next section, FEMA should be sure to incent STT-level actions that 
support and enable local-level adaptation efforts.) Doing so will create a simpler system to encourage 
broader STT-led adaptation action that compliments and supports more locally-driven resilience work. 
The agency’s updated policy should identify appropriate STT-level resilience measures (see next section) 
and seek to review and credit such actions on a sliding scale before disasters strike, per the language in 
the BBA. The result would be an agreed-upon cost share agreement for Permanent Work projects that 
could be executed without additional administrative burden in the wake of subsequent disasters. We 
believe such a system would drive significantly more resilience action than the Interim Policy as written 
and would improve access to the financial incentives amongst all communities.   
Mitigation Measures Eligible for Increased Federal Cost Share 

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
8 
 
The BBA listed several examples of STT-led pre-disaster mitigation measures FEMA could consider to 
earn an increased federal cost share on PA funding. The statute further directs the agency to use sliding 
scale to reward mitigation actions, clearly indicating FEMA should be measuring the level of adaptation 
effort by each STT against a continuous scale for cost share increases from 0-10%. The language leaves 
no doubt about the overall intent of the statutory change; Congress sought to create a flexible 
framework to incentivize a broad array of STT-led pre-disaster mitigation measures to proactively reduce 
disaster damages and loss of life.  
FEMA should deploy a much broader range of potential mitigation measures communities can deploy in 
exchange for increased federal cost share. Importantly, broadening the list will create more of a flexible 
framework that will allow STTs to participate in the program by selecting mitigation measures 
appropriate to their unique circumstances and vulnerabilities. We believe such flexibility is critical to 
encourage participation and ensure equitable access to the incentives. TNC supports the list of options 
included in the BBA, which are as follows: 
(i) The adoption of a mitigation plan approved under section 322; 
(ii) Investments in disaster relief, insurance, and emergency management programs;  
(iii) Encouraging the adoption and enforcement of the latest published editions of relevant 
consensus-based codes, specifications, and standards that incorporate the latest hazard-resistant 
designs and establish minimum acceptable criteria for the design, construction, and maintenance 
of residential structures and facilities that may be eligible for assistance under this Act for the 
purpose of protecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the buildings’ users against 
disasters;   
(iv) Facilitating participation in the community rating system; and   
(v) Funding mitigation projects or granting tax incentives for projects that reduce risk.  
TNC strongly supports mitigation measures that enable planning and implementation of projects to 
restore and conserve natural systems to mitigate the impacts of disasters. We implore the agency to add 
mitigation opportunities that facilitate the use of such nature-based solutions (NBS). Conserving and 
protecting natural resources often provides the most impactful and cost-effective line of defense against 
storms and extreme weather events, all while delivering a host of additional environmental and 
community benefits. For example, coastal wetlands prevented more than $625 million in property 
damages during Hurricane Sandy and reduced property damages throughout the Northeast by 10 
percent, on average.12 
FEMA has broadly embraced the use of NBS for pre- and post-disaster mitigation across its HMA 
programs, in recognition of the incredible value these solutions offer. Agency funding has been used to 
successfully reduce risk to communities via watershed restoration projects and aquatic connectivity; 
bank stabilization, erosion control, and living shorelines; projects that increase drinking water system 
resilience, water/energy efficiency, and water quality in natural basins; green mitigation techniques in 
buyout lots; wildfire resilience activities; and many other types of projects. In addition to reducing risks, 
 
12 Narayan, S., Beck, M. W., Wilson, P., Thomas, C. J., Guerrero, A., Shepard, C. C., Reguero, B. G., Franco, G., Ingram, 
J. C., & Trespalacios, D. (2017). The value of coastal wetlands for flood damage reduction in the northeastern USA. 
Scientific Reports, 7(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-09269-z  

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
9 
 
these projects provide many other benefits, such as filtering pollutants, reducing erosion, protecting 
breeding grounds for fish and shellfish, and enhancing recreation opportunities. TNC has long supported 
and worked closely with FEMA to expand the role of NBS in risk mitigation, including through a guide we 
produced in collaboration with AECOM to inform communities and states how to successfully secure 
FEMA mitigation funding to invest in NBS.13 We strongly urge the agency to follow in its own footsteps 
and work to encourage NBS as part of the PA cost share incentives. 
There are many examples of statewide actions FEMA should consider to encourage and facilitate 
deployment of NBS for risk reduction. Examples include programs that fund or support improved nature-
based shoreline protection and floodplain restoration/management, or grant programs that support 
nature-based risk reduction work. The agency could further consider STT efforts to engage with NBS 
work via other federal agency programs (e.g., EPA 319 grants) to make progress reducing environmental 
risk via NBS. There is also a wide range of potential planning measures and tax incentives states could 
employ to help scale NBS, which FEMA should closely consider to align with the list of potential 
mitigation measures included in the BBA. We discuss many of these measures in detail as part of our 
prior comments to the agency on the Disaster Deductible proposal from 2016 and the CRS redesign RFI 
from 2024.14 We further discuss cost-effective, impactful NBS solutions that should be considered for 
406-mitigation in our 2022 comment letter to the agency regarding PA.15 
There is huge potential value to expanding the range of eligible mitigation measures at the STT level. Yet, 
local communities also have a significant role to play in building resilience to natural hazards. While we 
urge FEMA to comply with the statute by focusing on STT-led efforts (as discussed above), we also 
encourage the agency to give specific attention to STT-led mitigation measures that specifically empower 
local-level adaptation. The BBA implicitly acknowledged the importance of these kinds of actions in the 
list of possible mitigation measures, which included facilitation of community participation in CRS and 
funding mitigation project work within communities at risk from natural hazards. There are many other 
measures the agency could consider to support local-level adaptation, some of which are included 
below. 
The particular list of suggested mitigation measures will depend on the agency’s updates to the Interim 
Policy in response to this RFI, particularly in regards to STT versus community-level eligibility and pre-
disaster versus post-disaster/project-focused work. FEMA must request additional public comments to 
help hone the list of mitigation measures once there is more clarity on architecture of a final policy. In 
addition to the actions included in the BBA and the general effort to support NBS and vulnerable 
communities described above, FEMA should consider the following specific mitigation activities: 
• 
Adoption of maps and other forms of information to identify areas at high risk from natural 
hazards, together with education programs to make the public aware of such hazard areas.  
 
13 Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, Pub. L. No.115-123, 132 Stat. 64 (2018). https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-
congress/house-bill/1892/text  
14 The Nature Conservancy. (2024). Response to Request for Information on the National Flood Insurance Program’s 
Community Rating System Redesign Effort. https://www.regulations.gov/comment/FEMA-2024-0022-0082  
15 See Appendix  

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
10 
 
• 
Supporting the development/adoption of land use plans that designate high hazard areas and 
encourage appropriate land uses to avoid economic losses, such as open space, recreation, and 
other low intensity uses. 
• 
Enactment of zoning or regional land use policies that seek to reduce economic losses from 
development in high hazard areas. 
• 
Establishment of programs to enable lands in high hazard areas to be voluntarily purchased 
and—where appropriate—restored and conserved for risk reduction and ecosystem benefits.  
• 
Establishment of statewide enabling policies which provide for transferable development rights 
programs to allow the economic value of development in hazard areas to be transferred from 
such areas to more appropriate areas designated for higher density development. 
• 
Enactment of real property tax abatements/reductions in high hazard areas where landowners 
have foregone development rights to proactively mitigate potential damage 
• 
Enactment of income tax credits for landowners in identified hazard areas who voluntarily place 
conservation, open space, or other types of easements (e.g. a flowage easement) on their 
property located in high hazard areas.   
• 
Establishment of voluntary open space purchase programs whereby a community allocates 
public financial resources to purchase land for public benefit, including the purchase of land in 
high hazard areas to prevent economic losses in such areas. 
 
Access to Incentives for Under-Resourced Communities 
Locally led adaptation is beneficial because those closest to disaster risks are typically in the best 
position to propose the most appropriate resilience solution. Critical to this concept is the freedom for 
STTs and local communities to select from a range of potential adaptation actions to address their 
unique challenges and needs. While we strongly support the adoption of resilient building codes as an 
effective resilience measure, some communities may not be in a position to do so for myriad reasons. 
Therefore, FEMA has potentially alienated innumerable under-resourced communities from 
participating in a PA cost share incentive program by so narrowly defining the list of eligible activities. 
We urge the agency to offer a more comprehensive list of pre-disaster mitigation measures that STTs 
and communities can employ to build their resilience and earn increased federal cost share for PA 
funding. Doing so will increase flexibility and options for STTs to support under-resourced communities 
with mitigation and accessing the financial incentives of the incentive program.  
 
Deploying 406-mitigation measures takes resources and capacity, as discussed above. We argue that 
even communities that are able to adopt the necessary building codes and qualify for a 10% increase in 
cost share under the Interim Policy are not guaranteed to have sufficient capacity to propose 406-
mitigation projects. Disaster recovery is incredibly taxing on STT and community resources, potentially 
limiting capacity for mitigation immediately following disasters even amongst well-resourced 
communities. Yet FEMA has proposed an incentive program that relies entirely on disaster-affected 
communities having the time and resources to propose 406-mitigation to reap the financial benefits. The 
Interim Policy will disproportionately exclude under-resourced communities, while high-capacity 
applicants that can navigate the 406-mitigation program will be rewarded for work they may have 
proposed even in absence of the increased federal cost share. As discussed above, we urge the agency to 

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
11 
 
shift the focus of the new incentives to pre-disaster, STT-led mitigation options to better support under-
resourced communities. 
Conclusion 
Congress granted FEMA significant authority in the BBA to incentivize pre-disaster mitigation work via 
increased federal cost share for PA funding. While the statute does not mandate the agency take any 
action, robust implementation of the authority would be consistent with FEMA's mission, related 
programs, and past policy proposals. The Interim Policy fails to take advantage of FEMA’s new power by 
focusing on post-disaster mitigation and significantly narrowing the scope of the incentive relative to the 
vision of Congress. The result is a new incentive that TNC argues will create unnecessary administrative 
burden, be mostly inaccessible to many under-resourced communities, and generally have limited 
impact on the scale of STT pre-disaster mitigation effort. The agency has further missed a key 
opportunity to create incentives for valuable nature-based solutions, which FEMA otherwise supports 
for risk mitigation purposes. We urge FEMA to align the Interim Policy with the agency’s Stafford Act 
authority by: 1) focusing on incentives for pre-disaster mitigation; 2) expanding the elevated federal cost 
share to all PA Permanent Work projects; 3) prioritizing STT-level adaptation efforts; 4) expanding the list 
of eligible mitigation measures—including actions that will help scale NBS and support local-level 
adaptation—to create a more flexible mitigation framework; and 5) ensuring the new financial incentives 
are accessible by under-resourced communities. 
Sincerely,  
Cameron Adams  
Climate Adaptation and Marine Policy Advisor  
North America Policy and Government Relations  
The Nature Conservancy  
cameron.adams@tnc.org  
 
 

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
12 
 
 
Appendix  
FEMA’s Request for Public Feedback on Cost-Effective Hazard Mitigation Measures  
December 19, 2022 
The Nature Conservancy (TNC) applauds FEMA’s consideration of expanded cost-effective hazard 
mitigation measures as part of its Public Assistance program. Designating additional actions as cost-
effective will help streamline, simplify and speed up disaster recovery efforts.  
TNC is a global conservation organization dedicated to conserving the lands and waters on which all life 
depends. Guided by science, we create innovative, on-the-ground solutions to the world’s toughest 
challenges so that nature and people can thrive together. We are tackling climate change, conserving 
lands, waters, and oceans at an unprecedented scale, providing food and water sustainably, and helping 
make cities more sustainable. Working in all 50 states and 72 countries, we use a collaborative approach 
that engages local communities, governments, the private sector, and other partners, including farmers, 
ranchers, and other landowners.  
As FEMA considers adding to its list of measures predetermined to be cost-effective and thus considered 
for Public Assistance funding without needing to further demonstrate cost-effectiveness, TNC strongly 
recommends you consider adding the conservation and restoration of various ecosystems, also referred 
to as nature-based solutions (NBS). Such investments have demonstrated risk reduction value, and we 
commend that they get added to Appendix J of the Public Assistance Program and Policy Guide.  
In addition to documented flood, wildfire, and drought risk reduction benefits of nature-based solutions, 
these investments also deliver a host of additional benefits, some of which are readily translated into 
monetary terms and some of which aren’t. Benefits of nature-based solutions include climate change 
mitigation, enhancement of biodiversity, and improved water and air quality. Additionally, nature-based 
solutions provide social benefits such as access to nature, recreational, aesthetic and quality of life. 
Some of these may be difficult to monetize, but none the less should be counted and considered when 
incenting investments in nature as a tool for risk reduction and enhanced resilience.  
We recognize and appreciate the significant progress that FEMA has made over the years in valuing 
nature-based solutions and incenting these approaches. Simply recognizing that NBS have a risk 
reduction value through statements and summary material on its website is welcome. In addition, the 
allocation of points when scoring Building Resilient Infrastructure for Communities (BRIC) applications is 
appreciated and demonstrates the value that FEMA places on NBS. FEMA’s improvements over the years 
to increase the number of nature-based pre-calculated benefits has also helped simplify the process for 
qualifying various NBS. And most recently, the adjustment to the cost-benefit assessment (CBA) 
methodology to allow a CBA of .75 when applying a 7% discount rate, should also enable more NBS to 
qualify for funding. 
There are numerous studies measuring the damage risk avoided by various ecosystems (so called natural 
infrastructure). We present here examples of those studies, presented by ecosystem type. We ask you 

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
13 
 
consider adding these as eligible for public assistance funding based on the documented damage risk 
avoided to property and infrastructure. 
 
Coastal Wetlands 
 
In a 2016 study, The Nature Conservancy, in partnership with Risk Management Solutions, a global 
leading risk modeler for the insurance industry, Guy Carpenter & Company, and others showed that 
marsh wetlands saved over $650 million in property damages during Hurricane Sandy and reduced 
annual property losses by nearly 20% in Ocean County, New Jersey (Narayan et al., 2016b) ((PDF) 
Coastal Wetlands and Flood Damage Reduction. Using Risk Industry-based Models to Assess Natural 
Defenses in the Northeastern USA (researchgate.net)) 
 
Varied Coastal Ecosystems 
 
In another study, The Nature Conservancy, in collaboration with SwissRe, a global reinsurer, shows 
that flood risk reduction strategies in the Gulf of Mexico that used nature-based defenses such as 
oyster reefs, wetland and island barrier restoration would be cost-effective for reducing coastal risk 
([PDF] COASTAL RISKS, NATURE-BASED DEFENSES AND THE ECONOMICS OF ADAPTATION: AN 
APPLICATION IN THE GULF OF MEXICO, USA | Semantic Scholar). See Figure 12 below that 
summarizes the findings. 
 
 
 
A 2015 study of a wave tank experiment shows significant attenuation of wave energy (up to 67%) by 
oyster reefs combined with saltmarsh for boat wake waves. (Wave attenuation experiments over living 
shorelines over time: a wave tank study to assess recreational boating pressures | Request PDF 
(researchgate.net) 
 

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
14 
 
Oyster Reefs 
 
In another 2005 study, shoreline retreat was significantly lower (by up to 33%) for experimental 
field sites with oyster reefs, compared to sites without oyster reefs. 
(http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1526-100X.2005.00062.x/abstract) 
 
Barrier Islands 
 
A study of barrier islands in Louisiana shows that healthy islands could reduce wave heights by 30% 
or more and delay the propagation of surges by up to two hours during hurricanes (Grzegorzewski et 
al., 2011). Similarly, the Louisiana Coastal Master Plan finds that nature-based defenses can 
contribute to regional risk reduction (Cobell et al., 2013; CPRA, 2017, 2012; Fischbach et al., 2012; 
Peyronnin et al., 2013) 
 
Mangroves 
 
A study using insurance industry catastrophe model quantified the coastal flood damages reduced by 
mangroves in Collier County, FL and from Hurricane Irma. The study found that annually, across multiple 
storms, mangroves reduced flood damages by 25.5% to properties behind mangroves in Collier County. 
During Hurricane Irma, over 626,000 people living behind mangroves saw reduced flooding and the 
mangroves averted $15 billion in surge-related flood damages to properties. 
Mangrove_Report_digital_FINAL.pdf (conservationgateway.org) 
 
Coral Reefs 
 
A series of reports from researchers at the USGS Coastal and Marine Hazards and Resources 
Program, the University of California, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
demonstrates how the restoration of coral reefs along the coasts of Florida and Puerto Rico can save 
hundreds of millions of dollars in storm-related damages every year. 
The reports assess the coastal protection benefits of reefs in the same rigorous, economic terms that 
are usually reserved for artificial defenses such as seawalls and bulkheads. 
The protection gained in Florida and Puerto Rico from potential coral reef restoration could result in 
the following: 
  
• 
Avoided flooding affecting >3,100 people annually 
• 
Avoided direct damages of >$124.2 million to >890 buildings annually 
• 
Avoided indirect damages to >$148.7 million in economic activity due to housing and 
business damage annually 
 
Riverine Culvert Upsizing 
 
We note that certain activities related to culverts are part of the current Appendix J. However, so-
called right-sizing culverts to allow for the flow of a 1% changes of flood to pass without exceeding 

 
4245 N. Fairfax Drive  
Tel: (703) 841-5300 
Suite 100 
 
 
Fax: (703) 841-7400 
Arlington, VA 22203  
www.nature.org 
 
 
15 
 
the capacity of the culvert is not explicitly listed as eligible. Properly sized and designed culverts have 
weathered large storms when nearby crossings have failed. Examples of upsized culverts performing 
as designed are as follows: 
  
• 
For example, during Tropical Storm Irene, over 1000 culverts failed in Vermont, stranding 
13 communities and requiring months of repairs. Yet several culverts that had been 
recently upgraded in Vermont’s Green Mountain National Forest weathered the storm’s 
high flows with no damage. 
• 
In Worthington, Massachusetts, a culvert on a section of Bronson Brook, a tributary of the 
Westfield River, catastrophically failed in an August 2003 storm. An upsized arch culvert, 
spanning the river width, was installed and has survived several major storms, including 
Tropical Storm Irene, without damage to the structure, road or adjacent stream banks (A. 
Singler, American Rivers, pers. comm). 
• 
In Hancock, New York, three flood events between 1996 and 2005 caused damage to an 
undersized culvert on Big Hollow Creek. In those nine years, Delaware County spent over 
$70,000 to repair damages to the culvert as well as the road and adjacent ditches. In 
addition, the detour length associated with closure of the road for repairs was 18 miles. 
Late in 2005, with hazard mitigation funding assistance from FEMA, the county installed a 
three-sided concrete box culvert with a natural bottom, designed to convey a 100-year 
storm and provided at a cost of $143,000. The improved crossing has survived seven 
federally declared flood disasters, including Irene, without significant damage since its 
replacement in 2005 (W. Reynolds, Delaware County Department of Public Works, pers. 
comm.). 
 
Riverine Floodplains 
 
A study by TNC and partners calculates the flood damages avoided from avoiding future 
development in floodplains. The study, published in Nature Sustainability, identified an area roughly 
the size of Colorado in “100-year” (1% chance of annually flooding) floodplains where conservation 
would be an economically sound way to avoid future flood damages. For just over 21,000 square 
miles of this area, the benefits are at least five times the cost, meaning that a dollar invested in 
floodplain protection today returns least $5 in savings from avoided flood damages in the future. 
  
The Nature Conservancy appreciates the opportunity to provide our input and comment in response 
to this RFI on expanding cost-effective hazard mitigation measures. We look forward to working with 
FEMA in advancing this important work. Please contact Sarah Murdock (smurdock@tnc.org ), Senior 
Director, Land and Water Policy, with any questions on this submission.

--- COMMENT ID: FEMA-2024-0029-0070 AND DOCKET ID: FEMA-2024-0029 ---
1 
 
January 29, 2025 
  
Regulatory Affairs Division, Office of Chief Counsel  
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C Street SW  
Washington, D.C. 20024 
 
 
Re: Comments on Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Interim Policy (Docket 
ID: FEMA–2024–0029) 
 
Background 
The Pew Charitable Trusts (Pew) appreciates the opportunity to submit comments on the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) Public Assistance (PA) Mitigation Cost Share Incentives 
Policy.1  
Pew is a non-profit research and public policy organization dedicated to serving the public. Pew has 
conducted research on state and federal spending related to natural disaster costs for nearly a 
decade. This has included reports examining the complex intergovernmental disaster management 
system, data gaps in tracking disaster spending, and steps governments can take to improve their 
approach to disaster budgeting.2 Additionally, for the better part of a decade, Pew’s flood-prepared 
communities initiative promoted efforts to reduce the impact of flood-related disasters on the U.S. 
economy, communities, and the environment. Using rigorous, analytical approaches to improve 
public policy, the initiative focused on prioritizing investments in flood-ready infrastructure, 
mitigating the impact of disasters, modernizing flood insurance, and promoting nature-based 
solutions.3  Recently, Pew has expanded the scope of its priority research and policy issues at the 
 
1 Federal Emergency Management Agency. “Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy”. 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2024/10/01/2024-22270/public-assistance-mitigation-cost-
share-incentives-policy. 
2 See The Pew Charitable Trusts, “What We Don’t Know About State Spending on Natural Disasters Could 
Cost Us”  (2018), https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/reports/2018/06/19/what-we-dont-
know-about-state-spending-on-natural-disasters-could-cost-us; “How States Pay for Natural Disasters in an 
Era of Rising Costs” (2020), https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/reports/2020/05/how-
states-pay-for-natural-disasters-in-an-era-of-rising-costs; “How States Can Manage the Challenges of Paying 
for Natural Disasters” (2020), https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/issue-
briefs/2020/09/how-states-can-manage-the-challenges-of-paying-for-natural-disasters; “Wildfires: Burning 
Through State Budgets” (2022), https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-
analysis/reports/2022/11/wildfires-burning-through-state-budgets. 
3 The Pew Charitable Trusts, “Flood Prepared Communities,” 
https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/projects/archived-projects/flood-prepared-communities. 

 
 
2 
 
federal and state levels to enhance community and environmental resilience to multiple types of 
natural disasters being faced across the country.4  
As FEMA is aware, natural disasters are becoming more frequent and severe, and the costs of those 
disasters are also rising, creating budget pressure at all levels of government.5 Pre-disaster 
investments in risk reduction, such as resilience planning, wetlands protection, and floodplain 
buyouts, have the potential to prevent more damage and destruction to homes and communities 
and lower the overall cost burden for governments and communities. While the size of savings may 
vary with location, scale, or type of actions undertaken, multiple studies underscore the cost-
effectiveness of pre-disaster action. Recent analysis indicates that for every dollar the federal 
government invests in mitigation, the public can save an average of up to $13.6  
Despite growing recognition of the importance of mitigation and an increase in federal investments 
in recent years, the federal government still spends significantly more on disaster recovery than on 
disaster mitigation. A 2021 study suggests that the federal government spends an average of $7 on 
recovery for every $1 spent on resilience.7 At the state level, Pew’s research has found that, despite 
an uptick in state-level attention and investment in risk reduction, urgent disaster needs related to 
disaster response and recovery often win out in funding debates.8 To effectively meet a growing 
need, greater investments in mitigation need to be made and maximized at all levels of government.  
Given this body of evidence, Pew strongly supports not only continued federal funding and support 
for pre-disaster mitigation, but also efforts at the federal level that would encourage mitigation by 
other levels of government. Unlike the original legislation behind it, Pew believes that the proposed 
PA Mitigation Cost Share Incentives policy does not achieve that goal for reasons outlined below. 
Consequently, FEMA should re-work the current proposal to better align with the original legislative 
intent. Doing so would allow FEMA to more effectively incentivize mitigation investment by all levels 
of government, allowing for improved outcomes for communities. 
FEMA’s interim policy does not meet Congress’s original intent  
As established by the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, Section 406(b)(3) of the Stafford Act creates 
the opportunity to address longstanding national mitigation goals. By offering an enhanced match 
 
4 The Pew Charitable Trusts, “U.S. Conservation,” https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/projects/us-conservation. 
5 See The Pew Charitable Trusts, “What’s Driving the Boom in Billion-Dollar Disasters? A Lot” 2023. 
https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/articles/2023/10/12/whats-driving-the-boom-in-
billion-dollar-disasters-a-lot; “How States Can Manage the Challenges of Paying for Natural Disasters” (2020) 
https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/issue-briefs/2020/09/how-states-can-manage-the-
challenges-of-paying-for-natural-disasters. 
6 The National Institute of Building Sciences, “Mitigation Saves: Mitigation Saves up to $13 per $1 Invested” 
(2020), https://www.nibs.org/files/pdfs/ms_v4_overview.pdf. 
7 The Brookings Institute, “Are Federal Policies Making the Harmful Impacts of Climate Change Even Worse,” 
2021. https://www.brookings.edu/articles/are-federal-disaster-policies-making-the-harmful-impacts-of-
climate-change-even-worse/ 
8 The Pew Charitable Trusts, “Wildfires: Burning Through State Budgets” (2022), 
https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/reports/2022/11/wildfires-burning-through-state-
budgets.  

 
 
3 
 
percentage for federal disaster recovery grants, it enables FEMA to provide a broad incentive for 
State or Tribal governments to take risk-reducing action before a disaster strikes.9  This policy 
change aligns with Pew’s research and policy recommendations by shifting the focus to proactive 
investment in pre-disaster mitigation and incentivizing state governments to take a funding and 
budgeting approach that prioritizes risk reduction.  
As currently written, FEMA’s interim policy departs from this statutory intent in a number of 
important ways:  
• 
The policy establishes a project-by-project certification, in place of the state-wide 
approach outlined in the statute: As referenced above, section 406(b)(3) focuses on 
incentivizing state-wide policies like building codes, emergency management programs, 
and tax incentives for risk reduction. Pew interprets this provision to mean that state or 
tribal governments that undertake one or more of the mitigation efforts outlined in the 
statute would be eligible for an enhanced cost share. In contrast, the interim policy 
presents a project-by-project certification process, wherein eligibility for an enhanced cost 
share would be determined based on the design of individual disaster recovery projects.   
Such an approach would impose unnecessary additional administrative burden on grant 
recipients, not to mention state and federal officials, by requiring them to establish 
eligibility for the increased cost share for each project in the aftermath of a disaster. 
Additionally, a project-by-project basis would not be as efficient nor produce policy 
changes and investments at the same scale as state-level interventions.  
 
• 
The interim policy incentivizes post-disaster mitigation, rather than pre-disaster 
action. Most, if not all, of the example activities included in section 406(b)(3) represent 
measures taken to reduce risk that occur before disasters occur. In contrast, the interim 
policy conditions any increased cost share on actions taken post-disaster, specifically in 
the form of recovery project design criteria.  This approach only rewards mitigation efforts 
undertaken in the wake of disasters, and only those disasters that receive federal 
assistance, rather than the type of proactive efforts that anticipate future risks identified in 
the legislation. As such, the policy misses the opportunity to encourage improved mitigation 
on activities like new construction project retrofits to make at-risk structures that have not 
yet been impacted by disasters more resilient. 
 
• 
The interim policy rewards an overly narrow range of mitigation activities.  State and 
local governments are exploring a multitude of approaches to improve disaster resilience, 
and the enacted legislation used broad language covering multiple options for mitigation, 
as noted earlier. Included in section 406(b)(3) were activities such as: 
 
9 Pew understands the use of “state” in this context to refer to U.S. states, the District of Columbia, and U.S. 
territories, as referenced in the Stafford Act. https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-2012-
title42-section5122&num=0&edition=2012. 

 
 
4 
 
o “The adoption of a mitigation plan approved under section 322;10 
o investments in disaster relief, insurance, and emergency management programs; 
o encouraging the adoption and enforcement of the latest published editions of 
relevant consensus-based codes, specifications, and standards that incorporate 
the latest hazard-resistant designs and establish minimum acceptable criteria for 
the design, construction, and maintenance of residential structures and facilities 
that may be eligible for assistance under this Act for the purpose of protecting the 
health, safety, and general welfare of the buildings’ users against disasters; 
o facilitating participation in the community rating system; and  
o funding mitigation projects or granting tax incentives for projects that reduce risk.” 
Despite this range of Congressionally endorsed options, the interim rule’s pre-disaster 
mitigation incentives are limited to adoption of certain building codes.  This is clearly a 
narrower set of incentives that limits the overall effectiveness and potential impact of  
FEMA’s proposed interim policy. In fact, since the Stafford Act and FEMA policy already call 
for incorporating safeguards from future disasters into project designs and making 
compliance with the latest protective building codes an eligible cost for Permanent Public 
Assistance projects, the policy may have little actual impact. 
Pew’s proposed changes to FEMA’s interim policy  
Pew urges FEMA to amend the interim policy to reward pre-disaster mitigation efforts at the state 
level, rather than provide project-specific incentives for post-disaster activities.  Specifically, the 
rules should be amended in the following ways: 
• 
Determine eligibility for the increased cost share at the state or tribal level, not the 
project level.  To effectively incentivize pre-disaster mitigation efforts, eligibility for 
increased cost share should be based on a state or tribe’s pre-disaster actions. Based on 
the legislative language, these approaches could be applied either across the jurisdiction’s 
full geography or could be targeted investments and programs aimed at a set of at-risk 
communities.  The increased cost share should then apply to all post-disaster PA work 
whether emergency or permanent and would extend to localities, non-profits, and other 
eligible entities. This approach would fulfill the promise that if states and tribes spend more 
on risk reduction state-wide before a disaster, they will spend less on recovery for disasters 
that do occur afterwards.  
 
• 
Significantly broaden the list of activities that make a state or tribe eligible for the 
increased cost share, as specified in the statute.  Again, the statutory language allows 
FEMA to offer the increased cost share in exchange for a range of activities cited above. 
FEMA’s amended policy should clarify that such investments count toward the increased 
cost share when there is evidence that they reduce future risk and provide examples of 
types of projects that meet this standard. FEMA has already invested considerable effort in 
 
10 Note that adoption of hazard mitigation plans has long been a prerequisite for access to certain federal 
post-disaster resources. 

 
 
5 
 
defining eligible risk-reducing projects for other initiatives. In 2016, FEMA developed and 
proposed a similar system for measuring state mitigation investment levels for a disaster 
deductible program.11  FEMA has also published a detailed list of eligible risk-reducing 
activities in the Hazard Mitigation Assistance Program and Policy Guide.12  FEMA should 
leverage these existing resources in determining how to measure and reward eligible state 
investments. 
 
• 
Develop a sliding scale formula to reward incremental levels of investment in 
mitigation made at the state and tribal levels.  States have differing abilities to fund 
mitigation projects and initiatives based on their fiscal and economic conditions. At the 
same time, different mitigation interventions have varying potential impact on risk 
reduction. FEMA should account for this by developing a formula to provide a more 
incremental sliding-scale for the increased cost share percentage. This formula should 
take state or tribal fiscal capacity into account and should provide incremental increases in 
cost share for incremental levels of investment.  For instance, a state with limited fiscal 
capacity might receive a commensurate increase in cost share for a nominally smaller 
investment than a state with a stronger fiscal position. And a particular mitigation action, 
such as implementing ambitious state-wide land use planning and building codes, might 
earn a state more of a cost share percentage than more straightforward or pre-existing 
efforts. FEMA already incorporates state fiscal capacity considerations into Individual 
Assistance determinations. This formula should build on that existing data and expertise. 
 
• 
Consider how this policy could allow credit for investments made by local 
governments.  While data availability and comparability may present challenges, Pew 
recommends that FEMA consider allowing states “credit” for local as well as state 
investments in mitigation for the increased cost share. For instance, if a locality within a 
state makes a significant mitigation investment, the state could submit information about 
that investment to FEMA to consider in determining the state’s eligibility for the increased 
cost share. Once state-wide eligibility is established, the increased cost share should apply 
to all political subdivisions within a state as well as to the state itself.  This approach will 
reward risk-reducing investments at all levels of government while sparing smaller local 
governments from the additional administrative burden of establishing their own eligibility.   
Pew appreciates FEMA’s efforts to date to move this important legislative provision towards 
implementation. As FEMA considers Pew’s comments on the interim policy as well as those of 
other organizations, we encourage relevant staff and leadership to reach out for further discussion. 
In particular, Pew stands ready to discuss opportunities to convene or organize integration of 
feedback into FEMA’s next iteration of this policy. Thank you once again for the opportunity to share 
Pew’s perspective on the interim policy. 
 
11 Federal Emergency Management Agency. “Establishing a Deductible for FEMA’s Public Assistance 
Program”. https://www.regulations.gov/document/FEMA-2016-0003-0150.  
12 Federal Emergency Management Agency, “Hazard Mitigation Assistance Program and Policy Guide,” 2024. 
https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_hma_guide_082024.pdf.  

 
 
6 
 
 
Sincerely,  
 
Colin Foard, Project Director  
Managing Fiscal Risks  
The Pew Charitable Trusts

--- COMMENT ID: FEMA-2024-0029-0075 AND DOCKET ID: FEMA-2024-0029 ---
January 29, 2025 
 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Office of Response and Recovery 
Public Assistance Division 
500 C Street SW 
Washington, DC 20472 
 
Via regulations.gov 
 
Re: Joint Comments in Response to FEMA’s Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy - 
Docket ID: FEMA-2024-0029 
 
The undersigned organizations support the hazard-resistant code pieces of the interim Public Assistance 
Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy released on September 26, 2024, especially the International 
Building Code, the editions captured, and the weighting provided. We commend the Federal Emergency 
Management Agency (FEMA) for recognizing the resilience benefits of codes and committing additional 
federal dollars to communities that adopt and enforce the two most recent editions of codes by 
increasing the federal cost share for response and recovery assistance from FEMA. And we appreciate 
the opportunity to provide feedback regarding this interim policy. 
 
During its 115th session, Congress was very intentional with enhancements regarding assistance related 
to building codes to both Sections 203 and 406 of the Robert T. Stafford Emergency Assistance and 
Disaster Relief Act (Stafford Act, P.L. 93-288, as amended) with passage of the Bipartisan Budget Act of 
2018 (BBA18, P.L. 115-123) and the Disaster Recovery Reform Act (DRRA, Div. D of P.L. 115-254). 
 
Following a series of costly natural hazard events and related oversight hearings, Congress recognized 
the role modern building code adoption and implementation activities play in reducing losses of life and 
property during disasters and authorized an expanded  pre-disaster mitigation program (via DRRA) to 
incentivize states, tribes, and territories to undertake building codes activities and to use the most 
recent editions as well as additional post-disaster funds (via BBA18) for states, tribes, and territories that 
had already done the work of adopting and enforcing either of the two most recent editions of model 
codes. 
 
FEMA’s Building Codes Save report noted the International Building Code (IBC) helped avoid more than 
$600 billion in losses.1 FEMA already requires the use of this code when paying for repair and 
reconstruction of public facilities, and variations of them are adopted in all 50 states to ensure property 
and life safety. The weighting the interim policy assigned these measures correctly recognizes the 
mitigation benefits resulting from more widespread adoption and enforcement. 
 
While the interim policy does not address all five of the considerations for an increased federal cost 
share envisioned by Congress from Sec. 20606 of BBA18, we encourage FEMA not to reduce the 
incentive for the hazard resistant codes recognized. As the policy is revised from an interim policy to a 
final policy, we encourage FEMA to ensure that any revisions are additive to the interim policy and do 
not lessen the incentive for codes or expand the number of editions recognized. 
-- 
 
1 Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Building Codes Save: A Nationwide Study (Nov. 2020). 

2 
 
 
Up-to-date editions of building codes and standards ensure public health and safety. They dramatically 
reduce disaster-related losses of life and property. And they contribute to individual, community, and 
national resilience to natural hazards. 
 
The adoption and enforcement of current building codes and standards remain two of the most 
effective risk mitigation measures a jurisdiction can undertake. Across the last decade and a half, FEMA 
has noted as much in each of its five-year Strategic Plans, most recently stating that “helping a 
community adopt and enforce disaster resistant building codes improves the resilience of the whole 
community. Research has shown that every dollar invested in building to the latest codes and standards 
results in $11 of future avoided losses. Therefore, advancing disaster resistant building codes through 
FEMA policies, programs, guidance, communications, and partnerships with state and local code officials 
are critical steps toward achieving a resilient nation.”2 In the prior plan, the Agency noted that 
“[d]isaster resilience starts with building codes, because they enhance public safety and property 
protection.”3 Further, during the first three BRIC cycles, the Agency encouraged the adoption and 
implementation of building codes as a “low cost, high impact” mitigation strategy. 
 
FEMA’s efforts are reflected in the National Mitigation Investment Strategy, issued by the Mitigation 
Framework Leadership Group (MitFLG)—chaired by FEMA and comprised of 13 other federal agencies 
and departments as well as state, tribal, and local officials. The Strategy makes several 
recommendations concerning the adoption, use, and enforcement of building codes, including that 
“[a]rchitects, engineers, builders, and regulators should use the latest building codes for the most up-to-
date requirements for structural integrity, mechanical integrity, [and] fire prevention” and that “[u]p-to-
date building codes and standard criteria should be required in federal and state grants and programs.”4 
 
For many years, FEMA has led efforts to advance the recognition of current building codes as a pillar of 
resilience. Currently, FEMA—through its chair of the MitFLG—has helmed the National Initiative to 
Advance Building Codes (NIABC) to coordinate across the federal interagency regarding how 
departments and agencies use building codes and provide assistance to state, local, tribal, and territorial 
governments in a more consistent manner, ultimately “enabling [them] to be more resilient to 
hurricanes, flooding, wildfires, and other extreme weather events” and “sav[ing] lives, reduc[ing] 
property damage, and lower[ing] utility bills.”5 
 
Unlike individual projects – the impact of which is frequently geographically limited – the protection 
afforded by modern, hazard-resistant codes benefits all construction activities as well as post disaster 
re-occupancy and recovery. The benefits of the I-Codes have been thoroughly analyzed by FEMA, the 
National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS), and other building science experts through peer-reviewed 
studies. FEMA should continue to prioritize support for these proven approaches. 
-- 
 
 
2 FEMA, 2022-2026 FEMA Strategic Plan (2022). Available at https://www.fema.gov/about/strategic-plan. 
3 FEMA, 2018-2022 FEMA Strategic Plan (2018). Available at: https://www.fema.gov/about/strategic-plan/2018-2022. 
4 Mitigation Framework Leadership Group, National Mitigation Investment Strategy (Aug. 2019). Available at: 
https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-10/fema_national-mitigation-investment-strategy.pdf. 
5 The White House, FACT SHEET: Biden-⁠Harris Administration Launches Initiative to Modernize Building Codes, Improve Climate 
Resilience, and Reduce Energy Costs (June 2022). Available at: https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/statements-
releases/2022/06/01/fact-sheet-biden-harris-administration-launches-initiative-to-modernize-building-codes-improve-climate-
resilience-and-reduce-energy-costs/ 

3 
 
The Agency continues to be strongly positioned to advance building code related activities, and thereby 
drive meaningful improvement in building safety and performance in the face of increasingly costly and 
damaging natural disasters. Safer and more resilient buildings strengthen community lifelines, reduce 
community risk, and ultimately reduce overall costs for community disaster recovery. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments. If you have any questions, please do not hesitate 
to contact us. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
American Concrete Institute 
American Society of Civil Engineers 
American Society of Interior Designers 
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) 
Concrete Masonry & Hardscapes Association 
Earthquake Engineering Research Institute 
Federal Alliance for Safe Homes – FLASH 
Floodproofing.com 
International Code Council 
National Council of Structural Engineers Associations 
National Environmental Health Association 
National Institute of Building Sciences 
National Ready Mixed Concrete Association 
Polyisocyanurate Insulation Manufacturers Association 
Pool & Hot Tub Alliance 
Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute 
Reinsurance Association of America 
Sheet Metal and Air Conditioning Contractors’ National Association 
Single Ply Roofing Industry 
Society of Fire Protection Engineers

--- COMMENT ID: FEMA-2024-0029-0006 AND DOCKET ID: FEMA-2024-0029 ---
10.12.24 
To: Robert Pesapane, Director, Public Assistance Division, Federal Emergency Management 
Agency, fema-recovery-pa-policy@fema.dhs.gov [Docket ID: FEMA-2024-0029] 
From: Mitchell Berger, (comments made in personal capacity), mazruia@hotmail.com 
Re: Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy, 
https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2024/10/01/2024-22270/public-assistance-
mitigation-cost-share-incentives-policy 
In response to the above notice and request for information, I write to make the following 
suggestions: FEMA should in its final cost share incentives policy define readiness and 
resilience, refrain from requiring adoption by applicants of a specific building code; and 
incentivize through this program development of microgrids and resilience hubs. 
In response to question 1, I recommend FEMA define resilience and readiness for the purposes 
of this policy. Section 406 of the Stafford Act states: “The President may provide incentives to a 
State or Tribal government to invest in measures that increase readiness for, and resilience from, 
a major disaster by recognizing such investments through a sliding scale that increases the 
minimum Federal share to 85 percent.” The Stafford Act does not define resilience in this 
context.1 In its National Resilience Guidance, FEMA defines resilience as “the ability to prepare 
for threats and hazards, adapt to changing conditions, and withstand and recover rapidly from 
adverse conditions and disruptions.”2 Likewise, it is unclear how FEMA intends to view 
‘readiness.’ Perhaps this could be viewed as analogous to preparedness as discussed in FEMA’s 
National Preparedness Guidance.3 Defining these terms is important to help ensure there is a 
shared understanding of programs that may qualify for these incentives. It also may help if the 
final policy cites a few examples of actual or hypothetical projects FEMA would view as 
qualifying for the additional incentives. 
In response to question 2, regarding “specific challenges faced by disadvantaged communities 
in meeting the requirements of the interim policy,” I urge FEMA not to require eligible 
applicants to have adopted specific building codes such as the 2024 or 2021 International 
Building Code. FEMA should continue to encourage adoption of the latest and most 
comprehensive, evidence-based building codes.4 Nonetheless, it has been noted that some 
communities may have various reasons for adopting or maintaining codes not cited by FEMA or 
other circumstances under which codes have not been adopted.5 Rather than mandating specific 
codes, FEMA could list examples of building codes it views as being effective but also expressly 
 
1 https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-03/stafford-act_2019.pdf 
2 https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_national-resilience-guidance_august2024.pdf 
3 https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-preparedness/goal 
4 https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/risk-management/building-science/building-codes-save-study; 
https://www.fema.gov/case-study/role-floridas-building-codes-2018-hurricane-michael; 
https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/risk-management/building-science/building-codes-strategy 
5 https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/risk-management/building-science/building-codes-strategy; 
https://transportation.house.gov/calendar/eventsingle.aspx?EventID=407799 

indicate the enhanced incentive is available to other communities provided they explain their 
alternative approach. 
In response to question 4, concerning “alternative measures that FEMA should consider 
incentivizing through the policy that would help to achieve greater readiness and resilience to 
future disasters,” I agree with comments I’ve seen that insurance should be incentivized. Many 
communities lack sufficient insurance for disasters.6 Consistent with its National Resilience 
Guidance I also urge FEMA to support and incentivize such efforts as resilience hubs and 
microgrids. Hubs can support day-to-day needs such as health and social services, recovery as 
well as natural disaster and emergency response activities. 7 Services offered, often based on 
neighborhood and community input,8 may include heat and cooling, wireless services, childcare, 
food and water distribution, community education and activities, including those geared toward 
emergency preparedness, behavioral health and other health care and job training. These hubs 
may be established at new or existing facilities such as libraries, recreational facilities, 
community centers and schools.9 Microgrids allow facilities to be self-supporting should the grid 
in a particular area be compromised during a disaster.10 In restoring facilities, these 
enhancements may make sense and prove cost-effective.  
Thank you for considering these suggestions. 
Sincerely,  
 
Mitchell Berger 
Note: I am submitting these suggestions in my personal/private capacity. The views expressed 
are mine only and should not be imputed to other individuals nor to any public or private entity. 
 
 
6 https://esg.wharton.upenn.edu/news/why-we-need-community-based-catastrophe-
insurance/;https://esg.wharton.upenn.edu/wp-content/uploads/2023/09/Inclusive-Insurance-Brief.pdf; 
https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/articles/2021/01/06/is-government-property-sufficiently-
insured-against-disasters 
7 While not emphasizing emergency preparedness, CDC and the Administration for Community Living (HHS) are 
supporting community care hubs which are consistent with the resilience hubs concept. A community care hub is a 
“community-focused entity that organizes and supports a network of community-based organizations providing 
services to address health-related social needs.” See One Week Left to Apply: Community Care Hub National 
Learning Community, https://acl.gov/news-and-events/announcements/one-week-left-apply-community-care-hub-
national-learning-community 
8 https://www.georgetownclimate.org/adaptation/toolkits/equitable-adaptation-toolkit/supporting-the-development-
of-resilience-hubs.html 
9 https://dlg.colorado.gov/resilience-hubs; https://resilience-hub.org/what-are-hubs/ 
10 https://www.energy.gov/oe/grid-systems 
Digitally signed by Mitchell Berger
DN: cn=Mitchell Berger, c=US, 
email=mazruia@hotmail.com
Date: 2024.10.12 14:21:12 -04'00'
Mitchell 
Berger

--- COMMENT ID: FEMA-2024-0029-0074 AND DOCKET ID: FEMA-2024-0029 ---
50 F Street NW - Suite 570 - Washington DC 20001 
(202) 800-0580 - coastalstates.org 
 
CSO Comment Re: PA Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy (FEMA-2024-0029) 
1 
 
January 29, 2025 
 
Via Regulations.gov Portal 
 
Robert Pesapane 
Director, Public Assistance Division 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
500 C St SW 
Washington, DC 20024 
 
Re: 
Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy (FEMA-2024-0029)  
 
Dear Mr. Pesapane, 
 
The Coastal States Organization (CSO) respectfully submits these comments to the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in response to the Public Assistance Mitigation Cost 
Share Incentives Policy, FEMA Interim Policy FP-104-24-002.1 Since 1970, CSO has served as the 
collective voice for the nation’s coastal states, commonwealths, and territories on policy issues 
relating to coastal, Great Lakes, and ocean management. CSO’s governor-appointed delegates – 
representing the state and territory Coastal Zone Management Programs – partner with coastal 
communities, federal agencies, tribal governments, academia, non-profit partners, and industry 
for the effective management, beneficial use, protection, and development of the coastal zone 
through the federal-state partnership established under the Coastal Zone Management Act.2 
 
State and territory coastal programs support resilient communities by working on the ground on 
planning, stakeholder engagement, and project implementation; developing and delivering 
coastal data; and communicating guidance on federal and state funding sources to develop 
application-ready projects. Close working relationships with coastal communities give CSO 
members a detailed understanding of the barriers and opportunities facing these communities in 
mitigating risk, adapting public infrastructure for future conditions, and leveraging federal funding 
programs efficiently.  
   
CSO offers these comments based on the experience and expertise of coastal programs. CSO’s 
comments are made in addition to and in support of comments submitted directly by coastal 
states and territories. 
 
 
1 Fed. Emergency Mgmt. Agency, Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy, 89 Fed.Reg. 79943 (Oct. 
1, 2024). 
2 16 U.S.C. § 1451 et seq. 

 
CSO Comment Re: PA Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy (FEMA-2024-0029) 
2 
CSO supports the objectives of the interim policy to incentivize communities to leverage the 
Public Assistance program for hazard mitigation, reduce community vulnerability, and enhance 
disaster readiness and resilience. Investment in hazard mitigation prevents damage and loss of 
life, strengthens community lifelines, and reduces the disaster recovery burden on local, state, 
and federal governments. Public Assistance Mitigation, providing support to build back damaged 
public facilities to withstand future disasters, is an indispensable and underutilized tool in FEMA’s 
toolbox for attaining state- and local-level hazard mitigation, alongside FEMA’s pre-disaster 
funding and capacity-building programs. 
 
Stafford Act § 406(b)(3) authorizes FEMA to incentivize states and tribal governments to invest in 
mitigation activities such as adoption of a Hazard Mitigation Plan, investment in disaster relief, 
insurance, and emergency management program, supporting communities to adopt and enforce 
up-to-date building codes, supporting communities to participate in the Community Rating 
System, and funding mitigation projects. 
 
The interim policy provides an increase to the federal cost share for Public Assistance projects 
which incorporate mitigation measures and for communities which adopt up-to-date building 
codes. These incentives are exclusively focused on decision-making at the local level. 
 
CSO supports the core 5% incentive for projects which incorporate substantial mitigation 
measures. This approach paves the way for more communities to leverage Public Assistance 
Mitigation. The increment for that provision in the final policy should remain compelling.  
 
However, we encourage FEMA to expand the policy to also incentivize the state-level mitigation 
activities advanced in § 406(b)(3). The § 406(b)(3) authority provides FEMA with an opportunity to 
connect not only with state emergency management and hazard mitigation programs, but also 
with state coastal management, floodplain management, housing, development, agriculture, and 
natural resource programs to make state-wide mitigation more cost effective and better aligned 
with local-level activities. FEMA should use § 406(b)(3) to support states which invest in pre-
disaster mitigation by enabling communities to better leverage those investments for well-
planned, consistent mitigation measures implemented post-disaster. The agency should further 
consider incorporating a certification process by which a state can certify with FEMA that it has 
implemented effective state-wide mitigation actions, and in turn, a portion of the cost share 
incentive would become automatically available to communities. 
 
Please reach out for further information to John Ryan-Henry (jryan-henry@coastalstates.org). 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Derek Brockbank 
Executive Director

--- COMMENT ID: FEMA-2024-0029-0073 AND DOCKET ID: FEMA-2024-0029 ---
1 
 
 
 
 
 
Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy:  Request for Comment  
Docket ID FEMA-2024-0029-0001 
January 29, 2025 
 
The Association of State Floodplain Managers (ASFPM) has been strong advocate for solutions to the 
rising costs and impacts of flooding in the United States for nearly 50 years and it is integral to our 
mission. Policy changes that promote mitigation and the smart investment of federal resources to address 
our country’s increasing number of severe and costly weather events are critical as annual flood losses 
have roughly doubled each decade since the 1990s and now average over $40 billion/year.  It is 
imperative that we do more to reduce these costs and their associated misery.   
 
As originally introduced, the 2018 Disaster Recovery Reform Act (DRRA) proposed that FEMA would 
incentivize communities to take proactive steps before a disaster by increasing federal recovery 
assistance available after a disaster. That original DRRA provision to allow FEMA to increase the federal 
cost share for communities that have experienced presidentially declared disasters was so important to 
Congress in the wake of hurricanes Harvey, Irma, and Maria and the then-record 2017 wildfire season 
that it was separately fast-tracked through placement in the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 (Sec. 20606 of 
P.L. 115-123) — prior to DRRA’s ultimate passage— which was enacted more than seven years ago, on 
February 9, 2018. 
 
The incentive provisions allow for FEMA to provide qualifying states, tribes, and territories with a 
reduced non-federal match by establishing criteria for an increase of 10% (up to 85% from the typical 
75% baseline) in federal funds post-disaster, if those states, tribes, or territories have taken steps to 
increase their disaster resilience and reduce their disaster risks. The Bipartisan Budget Act provision 
amends Section 406(b) of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (P.L. 93- 
288), to read: 
 
(3) INCREASED FEDERAL SHARE.— 
 
(A) INCENTIVE MEASURES.— The President may provide 
incentives to a State or Tribal government to invest in measures that 
increase readiness for, and resilience from, a major disaster by 
recognizing such investments through a sliding scale that increases 
the minimum Federal share to 85 percent. Such measures may 
include— 
 
(i) the adoption of a mitigation plan approved under 
section 322; 

2 
 
(ii) investments in disaster relief, insurance, and 
emergency management programs; 
 
(iii) encouraging the adoption and enforcement of the latest 
published editions of relevant consensus-based codes, 
specifications, and standards that incorporate the latest 
hazard-resistant designs and establish minimum acceptable 
criteria for the design, construction, and maintenance of 
residential structures and facilities that may be eligible for 
assistance under this Act for the purpose of protecting the 
health, safety, and general welfare of the buildings' users 
against disasters; 
 
(iv) facilitating participation in the community rating 
system; and 
 
(v) funding mitigation projects or granting tax incentives 
for projects that reduce risk. 
 
ASFPM believes that raising the federal cost share for FEMA’s post-disaster Public Assistance program 
from 75% up to 85% for proven mitigation measures can motivate investments in capacity and 
resilience.  The key is to identify the right set of actions that truly reduce risk over the long term. 
 
On September 26, 2024, FEMA released the interim policy, six years after the DRRA passed, as  FP-104-24-
002  FEMA Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share (Interim) Policy.  This policy created a 5% cost share 
incentive when the applicant completes an eligible Hazard Mitigation proposal on a PA Permanent Work 
project for which the total cost of the Hazard Mitigation Proposal is equal to or greater than 20% of the 
total eligible repair/restoration cost of the project.  It created a 10% cost share incentive when the 
requirement in #1 above is achieved and the applicant has adopted the current 2024 or the previous 2021 
edition of the International Building Code and the International Energy Conservation Code or equivalent 
standard.  A link to that policy can be found here:  https://www.regulations.gov/document/FEMA-2024-
0029-0002 . 
 
General Comments 
 
1. There has been a longstanding problem effectively implementing 406 mitigation. Replacing critical 
infrastructure as quickly as possible is everyone’s goal after a disaster event. The reality of that action 
is that the taxpayer will pay for the exact same damage again when the same (or a worse) event 
occurs in the future. It just does not pass the common-sense test. The federal government and FEMA 
proclaim to support hazard mitigation, but they continue to use tax payer money to put things back 
exactly as they were as opposed to rebuilding in a way that will reduce or eliminate damage in the 
future. 406 mitigation should be required for every PA worksheet. If a community wants to rebuild 
infrastructure exactly how it was when it was damaged, they should use local or state taxpayer 
dollars. If local and state governments are required to pay for infrastructure that does not consider 
hazard impacts, then eventually they may make wiser choices. The PA program continues the cycle of 
damage and repair, but a properly implemented 406 program could begin to reverse this decades-
long trend. 406 mitigation should be required with every PA worksheet unless a review of the project 
determines that it is not possible to mitigate. This starts with identifying potential hazard mitigation 

3 
 
options identified when a PA Permanent Work project worksheet is being written up.  But other 
problems,  including community/local awareness, FEMA’s own directives for opening/closing a Joint 
Field Office as quickly as possible, and Federal Coordinating Officers not being held accountable to 
ensure that the post-disaster hazard mitigation function is being maximized, are also seriously stifling 
406 mitigation opportunities.   
The reality is that identifying suitable mitigation options take both time and the right expertise, and 
FEMA field staff are already stretched thin.  When mitigation options are not identified early in the 
recovery process, such as when a project worksheet is being developed, doing it after the fact can 
result in delays that are unacceptable to the community.  So, the incentive - as identified in the policy 
- does not address the larger problem impeding Sec. 406 mitigation, which is the need to identify 
mitigation options initially. And thus, the incentive will be limited in effectiveness.  If the desire is to 
see more 406 mitigation, then ASFPM recommends that FEMA require the following after every 
Federal disaster declaration:  
a) Require for every Public Assistance (PA)  project worksheet that at least one mitigation measure is 
identified, regardless if it is eligible for PA funding, and require that such data be shared with the 
property owner and the community. 
b) Require Field Coordinating Officers (FCO’s) to be trained in mitigation programs, and include 
mitigation program delivery goals as part of their personnel evaluations. 
c) Ensure that Joint Field Office (JFO) operational goals equally value the effective delivery of hazard 
mitigation programs as well as disaster recovery programs.   
Ultimately, we do not believe that simply submitting 406 mitigation projects whose costs are 20% 
higher, are likely to be an effective trigger to incentivize the public’s interest in a higher federal cost 
share.   
 
2.  The recent code adoption trigger is limited, is partially misapplied, and needs to be overhauled if used. 
While ASFPM strongly supports the adoption and incentivization of adoption of the latest building 
codes, the IBC is not the only means to result in hazard resistant designs and buildings.  Other key 
standards and specifications that should be considered would include state higher standards for flood 
damage reduction (for projects as a result of a flood), new consensus standards, such as the ASCE 24-
24 standards that aren’t even in the latest version of the IBC, and other hazard-specific standards that 
may exceed the IBC and that might be implemented through special purpose regulations, or through 
zoning.  Any adopted/utilized standard which is at least equivalent or better than the latest version of 
the IBC, specific to the hazard being mitigated, should count under this trigger. Further, while ASFPM 
can certainly appreciate the importance of energy efficiency standards, getting credit for these would 
not seem to meet the intent of the law as it applies to hazard-resistant design.  Specific examples of 
better standards that are deserving of credit would include - but are not limited to - Montana’s state 
floodplain management standards (state standards that exceed the IBC for buildings in floodplains) 
and New York City’s Climate Resiliency Design Guidelines.    
 
3.  In addition to having better codes and standards, there are a slew of other statewide activities that 
should be considered as triggers for the higher federal cost share incentive.  These include, but are 
not limited to: 
 
a) State funded hazard mitigation/resilience programs that work either independently of federal 
hazard mitigation/resilience programs or in concert with them, including those that provide the 

4 
 
non-federal cost shares to federal mitigation projects through grants or loans (e.g., Minnesota 
Flood Hazard Mitigation Grant Program or Virginia Community Flood Preparedness Fund Grants)   
b) Statewide adoption of hazard resilient infrastructure standards and/or standards that require siting 
and design of private development and public infrastructure to take into account likely future 
hazard risks. 
c) State requirements for hazard insurance that go beyond federal minimums.  (i.e., the requirement 
by Florida Citizens Insurance to obtain and maintain a NFIP flood insurance policy as a condition of 
receiving a Citizens hurricane/wind policy). This could also include state mandates for hazards 
insurance.   
d) Adoption of enhanced state hazard mitigation plans and/or state resiliency plans that include 
future conditions.   
e) Tax policies that incentivize hazard mitigation actions (e.g., Colorado wildfire income tax 
incentive).  
f) Improved state hazard disclosure requirements. 
g) Establishing and maintaining a high-capacity state hazard mitigation program.  This could include a 
requirement that the program be EMAP Accredited or meet some other capacity threshold.  A 
capable state hazard mitigation program can not only work comprehensively with communities 
throughout the state, but will be able to more efficiently and effectively distribute hazard 
mitigation assistance statewide.   
 
Responses to FEMA’s Questions:   
 
1. How will the activities incentivized through the interim policy increase resilience or decrease future 
risk?  Please explain. 
 
As we have explained in much greater detail above, we find the current interim policy provisions 
significantly lacking in scope, breadth, and flexibility to truly incentivize resilience or decrease future risk. 
The policy should be modified to incentivize a much greater array of hazard mitigation options.  Further, 
the incentivization of 406 mitigation as stated in the policy without acknowledging and correcting the 
processes whereby PA related mitigation options are identified will not lead to a meaningful uptick in 
either 406 mitigation or increased resilience.  
 
2. Will there be specific challenges faced by disadvantaged communities in meeting the requirements 
of the interim policy? In particular, will disadvantaged communities have challenges in adopting the 
building or energy codes necessary for the 10% increase in cost share? Please explain. 
 
The most acute challenge faced by disadvantaged and non-disadvantaged communities alike in doing 406 
mitigation is the failure of current processes to require or even incentivize the initial identification of 
mitigation options in the first place.  You can’t ask for something if you don’t even know the options.  This 
can be fixed by fixing the processes related to initial recovery/PA project identification.   
 
To be successful in carrying out Public Assistance hazard mitigation, any such project or collection of 
projects will likely need to have available a variety of resources which many communities do not have 
immediately available. Thus, while financing is always critical, a 10% cost share reduction by and of itself, 
still may not be enough to help bring all the resources to bear when they are needed.  

5 
 
 
ASFPM also believes that disadvantaged communities will have challenges in adopting the building or 
energy codes necessary for the 10% increase in cost share.  Adopting a building code isn’t the endpoint; 
rather it is the beginning of a new effort by a community that will require resources and expertise if done 
correctly to ensure building codes that are adopted are properly administered and enforced.   
 
In many instances, and depending on the magnitude and nature of the damages associated with a 
disaster (and the risks in need of mitigation), States can often be one of the best overall coordinators of 
both disaster response and recovery, but also support for necessary hazard mitigation.  Many smaller 
communities will almost immediately look to State offices, as an example, such as the State Floodplain 
Manager’s office or State Hazard Mitigation office, to help assess their needs in the wake of a flood 
disaster.  In many cases, needs may include technical assistance and expertise, financial assistance, 
organizational assistance, planning assistance, and training, in addition to a myriad of practical assistance 
to carry out the work in the wake of disaster.   However, it is acknowledged that for large disasters and 
catastrophic events, even state capacity can be exceeded.   
 
3. Are the incentives outlined in the policy sufficient to encourage additional investment or activity that 
would not have otherwise occurred? Why or why not? 
 
No.   In our comments above, we cite a broad array of improvements that could and should be made in a 
final PA Policy. Many of our recommendations emphasize the need for resources to be put into pre-
disaster mitigation efforts which will give  communities a wider range of options and types of assistance 
to  foster greater investment and activity to reduce risks and costs in the future.  
 
4. Are there alternative measures that FEMA should consider incentivizing through the policy that 
would help to achieve greater readiness and resilience to future disasters? Some examples are outlined 
in the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018, which authorized FEMA to provide the cost share incentives under 
the PA program, including: adoption of a mitigation plan, participation in the community rating system, 
and making investments in disaster relief, insurance, and emergency management programs. Please 
comment on those examples and/or provide additional examples. 
 
ASFPM has identified a number of possible measures that should be considered.  And we emphasize that 
the measures should be thought of as a menu of options.  States are varied in their approaches to hazard 
risk reduction, and there are different paths to get there.  FEMA’s approach to incentivizing these actions 
should be flexible and allow for some variation from state to state.   
 
5. Are there ways to make the interim policy more accessible or to decrease public burden in its 
implementation? Please provide examples. 
 
A primary focus on and support of mitigation at the JFO so that 406 mitigation options are identified early 
in the recovery process is key.  Also, building capacity at State level mitigation programs to compliment 
JFO operations but also assist communities through the entirety of a project is important too. Below is a 
real world example of how this situation is playing out in a state right now dealing with a major disaster: 
 
The push in the JFO to schedule as many Exploratory Calls and RSMs as quickly as possible makes 
it practically impossible to ensure that the state can be on the calls to support their PA applicants. 
This limits the ability of the state to advocate for the inclusion of hazard mitigation activities in 

6 
 
the recovery phase. PDMGs often are not listening to the applicants in these conversations and 
state participation is important. One solution may be to create meaningful JFO metrics and 
dashboards to track Exploratory Calls and RSMs and track how many the state is able to attend 
and discuss potential 406 activities. Additionally, access for state staff providing incident support 
at the JFO to the FEMA Grants Portal allows state mitigation staff to fully understand the 
situation in order to provide the best support for applicants and FEMA. 
 
Additionally, the fact that there are two parallel, sometimes similar programs makes it confusing for 
applicants. Precalculated benefits should also be expanded across 404 and 406. If an activity is 
automatically cost effective in one program it should also be considered cost effective in the other 
program.  
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this interim policy.  For questions please do not hesitate to 
reach out to Chad Berginnis at cberginnis@floods.org or Meg Galloway at meg@floods.org.

--- COMMENT ID: FEMA-2024-0029-0076 AND DOCKET ID: FEMA-2024-0029 ---
January 29, 2025 
 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Office of Response and Recovery 
Public Assistance Division 
500 C Street SW 
Washington, DC 20472 
 
Via regulations.gov 
 
Re: Comments in Response to FEMA’s Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy - 
Docket ID: FEMA-2024-0029 
 
The International Code Council (“ICC” or “Code Council”) is a nonprofit organization of over 700 
employees – driven by the engagement of its more than 60,000 members – dedicated to helping 
communities and the building industry provide safe, resilient, and sustainable construction through the 
development and use of model codes and standards used in design, construction, and compliance 
processes. Most U.S. states and communities, federal agencies, and many global markets choose the 
International Codes® (I-Codes®) to set the standards for regulating construction and major renovations, 
plumbing and sanitation, fire prevention, and energy conservation in the built environment. The codes, 
standards, and solutions developed by the International Code Council are used to ensure safe, 
affordable, resilient, and sustainable communities and buildings worldwide. 
 
The International Code Council strongly supports the hazard-resistant code pieces of the interim “Public 
Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy” released on September 26, 2024, especially the 
codes recognized, the editions captured, and the weighting provided. We commend the Department of 
Homeland Security’s (DHS) Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for continuing to recognize 
the dramatic reduction in recovery expenditures that resilient codes facilitate by incentivizing their 
adoption and effective implementation. We appreciate the opportunity to provide feedback regarding 
this interim policy. 
 
Bipartisan, Historic Support for Resilient Codes 
 
Across multiple administrations, FEMA has led efforts to advance the recognition of current building 
codes as a pillar of resilience. Up-to-date editions of building codes and standards ensure public health 
and safety. They dramatically reduce disaster-related losses of life and property. And they contribute to 
individual, community, and national resilience to natural hazards. 
 
During its 115th session (January 2017-January 2019), Congress focused on Stafford Act (Robert T. 
Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act; P.L. 93-288, as amended) enhancements related 

 
 
 
to building codes with passage of Disaster Recovery Reform Act (DRRA, Div. D of P.L. 115-254), and also 
the earlier Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 (BBA18, P.L. 115-254). 
 
Following a series of costly hurricanes, floods, and wildfires in 2017 and the oversight hearings that 
followed, Congress recognized 1) the role modern building code adoption and implementation activities 
play in reducing losses of life and property during disasters and 2) the significant return on investment 
to the American public that would result from investments in up-to-date building code adoption and 
implementation.1 Recognizing their demonstrated potential to reduce recovery expenditures, through 
DRRA and BBA18, Congress established new incentives to encourage state, local, tribal, and territorial 
governments to adopt and effectively implement hazard resistant codes. The first Trump Administration 
oversaw significant advancement in this space through the efforts to fully enact DRRA. 
 
In August of 2019, the Mitigation Framework Leadership Group (MitFLG)—chaired by FEMA and made 
up of another 13 federal agencies and departments as well as state, tribal, and local officials— released 
the National Mitigation Investment Strategy (NMIS). The Strategy makes several recommendations 
concerning the adoption, use, and enforcement of building codes, including that “[a]rchitects, engineers, 
builders, and regulators should use the latest building codes for the most up-to-date requirements for 
structural integrity, mechanical integrity, fire prevention” and that “[u]p-to-date building codes and 
standard criteria should be required in federal and state grants and programs.”2 
 
This focus was further validated by the 2019 National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS) Mitigation 
Saves report, which found that the International Building Code (IBC) helped generate $11 dollars in 
mitigation benefits against hurricane, flood, and earthquake risks for every $1 dollar invested1 and 
FEMA’s 2020 FEMA’s Building Codes Save report, which found the IBC could help avoid more than $600 
billion in future losses from flood, hurricane, and earthquake risks.3 
 
Codes Save Lives 
 
Beyond mitigation in a traditional sense, as it relates to discrete hazards or systems, the I-Codes have 
been shown to provide broader, second-order benefits for community resilience. For instance, three 
U.S. National Laboratories recently found that during prolonged weather-induced power outages 
coupled with extreme heat or cold, the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC), which governs 
the building envelope, can reduce deaths due to extreme heat by 80 percent and extreme cold by 30 
percent.4 Unfortunately, Texas has twice experienced this tragic combination within the last half 
decade: first, in February, 2021, during a winter storm, which resulted in 161 deaths from extreme cold 
exposure related deaths due to a lengthy power outage (of 246 total storm-related deaths);5 second, 
following Hurricane Beryl last summer, which resulted in at least ten deaths caused by heat exposure 
due to an extended power outage.6 
 
 
1 National Institute of Building Science (NIBS), Natural Hazard Mitigation Saves (Dec. 2019). 
2 Mitigation Framework Leadership Group, National Mitigation Investment Strategy (Aug. 2019). 
3 Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Building Codes Save: A Nationwide Study (Nov. 2020). 
4 U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Enhancing Resilience in Buildings Through Energy Efficiency (July 2023). 
5 Texas Department of State Health Services, February 2021 Winter Storm-Related Deaths – Texas (Dec. 2021). 
6 Houston Public Media, Two more deaths attributed to Hurricane Beryl as Houston-area death toll rises to 38 
 (Aug. 27, 2024). 

 
 
 
FEMA already requires the use of the resilient codes the Interim Policy cites when paying for repair and 
reconstruction via its Public Assistance program, and variations of them are adopted in all 50 states to 
ensure building safety and an effective building envelope. The weighting the interim policy assigned 
these measures correctly recognizes the mitigation benefits resulting from more widespread adoption 
and enforcement. 
 
The Importance of Current Codes 
 
The I-Codes are updated every three years to keep pace with advancements in building science, 
technology, and best practices, along with lessons learned following disasters. The three-year cycle 
permits sufficient vetting and consensus building around code updates as well as time to train the 
building safety professionals that implement the code in practice. For instance, a code change could be 
adopted two years before it’s finalized in a published edition which is then subjected to a jurisdiction’s 
own review process. 
 
The transition from the 2021 to the 2024 I-Codes alone saw the updates to wind, earthquake, and rain 
loads, including a significant update in snow loads (based on decades of additional data and analyses by 
the ASCE). For the first time ever, based on National Institutes of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
research following the devastating 2011 Joplin, Missouri tornado, the 2024 IBC now includes tornado 
loading. The 2024 codes also include new provisions to address hazards associated with energy storage 
systems, based on lessons learned from fires involving such systems. 
 
Code improvements can also generate cost savings through new construction mechanisms. In recent 
years, the I-Codes have incorporated an extensive array of new technologies and best practices that 
enable and advance construction of tiny homes, reuse of shipping containers, the utilization of cross-
laminated timber (CLT), and 3-D printed structures.  
 
DRRA and BBA18 recognize current codes’ benefits and ensure that federal code incentives are tied to 
current editions. Using outdated codes leads to construction of homes, schools, and hospitals based on 
outdated requirements that can increase costs, limit design choices, and lock in known and avoidable 
risks, for the decades-long lifespan of those structures. Particularly where government dollars are 
involved in that construction, building to outdated standards makes no sense; it’s a poor use of federal 
resources. 
 
Codes Protect Communities without Harming Housing Affordability  
 
Contemporary research continues to find that modern model building codes have no appreciable 
implications for housing affordability—in fact, no peer-reviewed research has found otherwise. Any 
potential impact from codes would primarily affect construction costs. However, one study considering 
the role of government regulation on home prices found that construction costs, including labor and 
materials, were flat from 1980 to 2013.7 
 
 
7 Gyourko, J. & Molloy, R., Regulation and Housing Supply, Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, Volume 5B 
Chapter 19 (2015). 

 
 
 
As noted earlier, the International Code Council was formed in 1994, the I-Codes were adopted across 
the country in the early 2000s, and several significant advancements to better mitigate structures 
against natural hazards were integrated into these codes during the period studied. None of these code 
activities meaningfully impacted construction costs.  
 
After Moore, Oklahoma experienced its third violent tornado in a 14-year span, the city significantly 
strengthened its building codes. The Moore Association of Home Builders estimated a $1 to $2 dollar 
per square foot resulting increase in the cost of construction. Yet, researchers found that the change to 
a stronger building code had no effect on the price per square foot or home sales.8 
Similar reductions in disaster damages and total losses have been identified elsewhere through FEMA’s 
Mitigation Assessment Team’s (MAT) reports. 
 
The most detailed benefit-cost analysis of seismic code adoption to date modeled six buildings in 
Memphis, Tennessee and compared the costs of adhering to the seismic provisions of the 2012 edition 
of model building codes as opposed to late 1990s-era codes. The study found that adopting the 2012 
codes – for the apartment building studied – would add less than one percent to the construction cost 
(and less to the purchase price, since construction cost typically amounts to between one-third and two-
thirds of purchase price), reducing annualized loss—in terms of repair cost, collapse probability, and 
fatalities—by approximately 50%.9 
 
The principal investigator for the NIBS report found that improvements to model building codes’ 
resilience over the nearly 30-year period studied only increased a home’s purchase price by around a 
half a percentage point in earthquake country or in an area affected by riverine flood.10  
 
In addition to having no appreciable impact on housing cost, up-to-date codes provide considerable 
benefits to homeowners. According to the Association of State Floodplain Managers (ASFPM), the 
insurance savings from meeting current codes’ flood mitigation requirements can reduce homeowners’ 
net monthly mortgage and flood insurance costs by at least five percent.11 Codes also reduce the risk of 
damage or full loss of housing in the face of hazards, helping maintain the availability of housing units. 
The adoption and implementation of building codes also has implications for the finance industry. 
Multiple CoreLogic studies have found that buildings built to recent code requirements have a 
significantly reduced likelihood of mortgage default following a disaster event. Recent analysis following 
hurricanes Irma (2017), Harvey (2017), Michael (2018) and Laura (2020) in Florida found that the 
adoption of codes had a statistically significant impact in reducing mortgage defaults.12 
 
 
8 Simmons, K. & Kovacs, P., Real Estate Market Response to Enhanced Building Codes in Moore, OK, Investigative 
Journal of Risk Reduction (March 2018). 
9 National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP) Consultants Joint Venture, Cost Analyses and Benefit 
Studies for Earthquake-Resistant Construction in Memphis, Tennessee, NIST GCR 14-917-26 (2013). 
10 Porter, K., Resilience-related building-code changes don’t affect affordability, SPA Risk LLC Working Paper Series 
2019-01 (2019). 
11 Association of State Floodplain Managers’ (ASFPM) Comments in Response to FR-6187-N-01, White House 
Council on Eliminating Barriers to Affordable Housing Request for Information (Docket HUD-2019-0092). 
12 CoreLogic and IBHS, Do Modern Building Codes Mitigate Mortgage Delinquency Following Landfalling 
Hurricanes? The Influence of Building Codes on Mortgages (2023).  

 
 
 
The cost effectiveness of modern codes is due in no small part to the active participation in the code 
development process of stakeholders representing development and property management interests. 
Building owners and managers, home builders, architects, design professionals, building trades, the fire 
service, plumbing and sanitation professionals, manufacturers, and others representing the housing 
industry devote considerable time and effort towards ensuring code updates are practical, cost 
effective, and more economical in comparison to alternatives. Importantly, the Code Council is the only 
model code developer that requires affordability considerations with every update to its residential 
code. 
 
Federal Support for Consensus Based Codes and Standards 
 
The Code Council believes that federal policies that leverage and incentivize consensus-based codes and 
standards should work to raise the bar for building resiliency uniformly. Greater use of consistent, more 
resilient construction codes advances hazard resistance but also eases implementation for both FEMA 
and state, local, tribal, and territorial governments. Greater consistency promotes market efficiency and 
cost savings. In contrast, a patchwork approach would complicate and hinder implementation and 
encourage balkanization of construction requirements, which is not in the public interest.  
 
As noted above, the Code Council encourages federal policy on codes and standards to encourage 
coordination. Proper correlation of codes and standards can ease implementation of construction 
requirements, while a lack of correlation can create implementation challenges. 
 
The Code Council strongly believes that federal government should prioritize the use of codes that 
incorporate the latest hazard resistant design and are consensus-based, nationally utilized, coordinated, 
and cost effective to maximize resilience and minimize implementation challenges.13 The codes FEMA 
recognized in the Interim Policy meet each of these requirements.  
 
Keeping What Works 
 
While the interim policy does not address all five of the considerations for an increased federal cost 
share as spelled out by Congress within Sec. 20606 of BBA18, we encourage FEMA not to reduce the 
incentive for the hazard resistant codes recognized. As the policy is revised from an interim policy to a 
final policy, ICC encourages FEMA to ensure that any revisions are additive to the interim policy and do 
not lessen the incentive for codes or expand the number of editions recognized. 
 
-- 
 
The adoption and enforcement of current building codes and standards remain two of the most 
effective risk mitigation measures a jurisdiction can undertake. Across the last decade and a half, FEMA 
has noted as much in each of its five-year Strategic Plans, with FEMA’s Strategic Plan released by the 
first Trump Administration stating that “[d]isaster resilience starts with building codes, because they 
enhance public safety and property protection.”14 Further, during the first three BRIC cycles, the Agency 
 
13 ICC, comments to FEMA re: Public Assistance Consensus-Based Codes, Specifications, and Standards Policy 
Update Public Comment Period (April 2024). 
14 FEMA, 2018-2022 FEMA Strategic Plan (2018). 

 
 
 
encouraged the adoption and implementation of building codes as a “low cost, high impact” mitigation 
strategy. 
 
As noted above, FEMA has led efforts for many years to advance the recognition of current building 
codes as a pillar of resilience. FEMA‘s Building Codes Task Force is working to achieve coordination and 
consistency across the federal government to streamline the interplay between the federal government 
and the Authorities Having Jurisdiction at the state, local, tribal, and territorial levels that ultimately 
adopt and enforce building codes. 
 
Unlike individual projects – the impact of which is frequently geographically limited – the protection 
afforded by modern, hazard-resistant codes benefits all construction activities as well as post disaster 
re-occupancy and recovery. The benefits of the I-Codes have been thoroughly analyzed by FEMA, NIBS, 
and other building science experts through peer-reviewed studies. FEMA should continue to prioritize 
low-cost, high-impact support for these proven approaches. 
 
-- 
 
The Agency continues to be strongly positioned to advance building code related activities, and thereby 
drive meaningful reduction of the costs associated with future natural disasters to the taxpayer and 
improvements in building safety and performance that will lower costs for owners, operators, and 
occupants. Safer and more resilient buildings strengthen community lifelines, reduce community risk, 
and ultimately reduce overall costs for community disaster recovery. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to provide comments. If you have any questions, please do not hesitate 
to contact me. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
Aaron Davis 
Vice President, Federal Relations

--- COMMENT ID: FEMA-2024-0029-0071 AND DOCKET ID: FEMA-2024-0029 ---
1 
 
 
January 29, 2025 
 
SUBMITTED VIA REGULATIONS.GOV:    
Office of Response and Recovery, Public Assistance Division 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) 
500 C Street, SW 
Washington, DC 20472 
 
Re:  
Comments on the Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy, 
Docket ID: FEMA-2024-0029. 
 
For over a decade, BuildStrong America and our undersigned partners — a coalition of 
firefighters, emergency managers, insurers, engineers, architects, contractors, manufacturers, 
consumer organizations, and the broad business community — have advocated for solutions to 
address rising disaster costs and impacts, contributing to provisions in the Bipartisan Budget Act 
of 2018 (BBA, P.L. 115-123) and the Disaster Recovery Reform Act of 2018 (DRRA, Division D 
of P.L. 115-254).  
 
Thus, we appreciate the opportunity to provide feedback on FEMA’s Public Assistance 
Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy (Docket ID: FEMA-2024-0029), released on September 
26, 2024, which implements Section 406(b)(3) of the Stafford Act as required by the Bipartisan 
Budget Act of 2018. While the law aimed to incentivize proactive state investments in risk 
reduction, the interim policy falls short of meeting congressional intent, missing critical 
opportunities to operationalize key measures of the law. The interim policy misses the mark by: 
 
 Ignoring statutory language, including specific resilience measures listed in the law.  
 Favoring a reactive approach, increasing administrative burdens, and complicating access to 
incentives. 
 Coupling energy codes with hazard-resistant building codes, shifting focus away from 
predisaster mitigation. 
 Overlooking critical infrastructure and failing to prioritize insurance, including parametric 
solutions, as a resilience measure. 
 Adding bureaucracy and emphasizing post-disaster compliance, which risks fostering 
reliance on federal aid instead of encouraging state-led predisaster investments. 
 
These shortcomings are especially unfortunate as our organizations have consistently highlighted 
the provision and offered to support policy and practical implementation with subject matter, 
emergency management, and industry experts.1 
 
 
1 (see: Coalition & Stakeholder Letter to FEMA Leadership on Lack of Cost Share Implementation | March 22, 
2023; BuildStrong America Letter to FEMA re: Public Assistance Program and Policy Guide | August 15, 2024; 
BuildStrong America Letter to FEMA re: Proposed Rule on FEMA’s Public Assistance Regulation | September 3, 
2024); National Institute of Building Sciences. (n.d.). Disaster resilience is a trillion-dollar challenge—Here’s what 
FEMA can do to help. Retrieved January 3, 2025, from https://www.nibs.org/blog/disaster-resilience-trillion-dollar-
challenge-heres-what-fema-can-do-help.) 
901 Seventh Street NW, Suite 200 
Washington, DC 20001 
info@buildstrongamerica.com

 
2 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
States have consistently demonstrated the value of investing in proactive resilience, predisaster 
mitigation projects and measures, building capacity, and reducing risks that ultimately lower 
federal disaster costs. These efforts align with the type of programs Congress intended to reward 
with increased cost-share post-disaster. For example: 
 
 Strengthen Alabama Homes promotes resilient, disaster-resistant housing by encouraging 
higher safety standards like the FORTIFIED Home program, ensuring affordability and 
energy efficiency, and partnering with local stakeholders.2 Despite its success in reducing 
repair costs, improving housing stock, and lowering insurance rates, the program would not 
be recognized under the interim policy as currently drafted due to Alabama’s lack of a 
statewide building code.  
 Florida has implemented innovative resilience programs to address weather challenges, such 
as the My Safe Florida Home Program, which provides grants for retrofitting homes against 
hurricanes, and the Resilient Florida Program, which funds projects addressing flooding and 
sea-level rise. These efforts, complemented by research from the Florida Flood Hub for 
Applied Research and Innovation, enhance community resilience and mitigate risks. While 
Florida has adopted the codes required by the interim policy, Florida would first have to 
submit 406 proposals on a project-by-project basis post disaster, adding administrative 
burdens and failing to fully reward the state’s numerous other proactive resilience 
investments. 
 
The examples above highlight how effective resilience initiatives are overlooked or burdened by 
the interim policy’s narrow scope and administrative demands. These programs demonstrate 
proactive investments that reduce disaster risks yet are not recognized under the current 
framework. To further outline our concerns, we offer the following comments on the interim 
policy. 
 
Misalignment with Congressional Intent 
The original intent of the law was clear: to incentivize states and tribal and territorial 
governments3 to make their own meaningful, proactive investments in risk reduction, which in 
turn would lower federal disaster expenditures over time. The sliding scale authorized by 
Congress would allow the President to increase the federal cost share to 85% postdisaster (from 
75%) for predisaster measures such as: 
 
 Adoption of an approved mitigation plan.4  
 Investments in disaster relief, insurance, and emergency management programs. 
 
2 Alabama Department of Insurance. (n.d.). State Assistance for Homeowners program. Alabama Department of 
Insurance. https://www.aldoi.gov/sahbio.aspx 
3 For simplification, hereinafter, “states” is used to refer to “states, territories, and tribes.” 
4 To date, every state and territory has a mitigation plan. 
 

 
3 
 
 Adoption and enforcement of the latest building codes. 
 Participation in the Community Rating System (CRS). 
 Funding mitigation projects or offering tax incentives for risk-reduction projects. 
 
FEMA’s interim policy, however, relies heavily on federal funding, offering a cost share increase 
for proposed mitigation projects that would be predominantly supported by federal dollars post 
disaster, which undermines incentives for proactive, predisaster state investments. It is important 
to note that proposals for 406 projects are not included in the law. Additionally, the interim 
FEMA policy expanded eligibility to local governments and nonprofits, which could be an 
additional, important step, but not in the context of the statutory requirements.  This approach 
further shifts the focus away from state-driven resilience efforts. 
 
Discouraging Proactive Resilience 
 
The interim policy’s incentives fall short of encouraging meaningful additional investment in 
resilience and predisaster mitigation. While a 10% cost share increase may seem appealing, the 
policy’s focus on postdisaster mitigation, rather than rewarding predisaster investments, 
undermines its effectiveness. The interim policy’s misalignment with proactive resilience 
measures and projects represents a missed opportunity to foster long-term disaster resilience and 
a good use of taxpayer dollars. By prioritizing federal postdisaster spending over state led 
predisaster investments, the policy overlooks successful state-led resilience programs, such as 
the examples cited above, which have demonstrated significant benefits in improving 
community, business, and individual citizen resilience.  
 
Furthermore, the policy’s narrow focus on building and energy codes neglects critical lifeline 
infrastructure resilience, including roads, bridges, the electric grid, and water systems, which are 
essential components of a community's ability to withstand and recover from disasters. The 
interim policy does not acknowledge the broader scope of emergency management and disaster 
relief programs that contribute to resilience. Comprehensive preparedness programs that address 
community-wide risks, such as wildfire management, flood prevention, and use of nature-based 
solutions are essential but are not considered under the current framework, further limiting the 
policy’s potential to foster long-term resilience and missing the opportunity to encourage holistic 
approaches to resilience that could yield substantial long-term benefits and reduce overall 
disaster costs. 
 
Administrative Burden and Complexity 
 
The interim policy’s administrative burden and complexity create significant challenges that 
undermine its effectiveness and accessibility. By requiring project-by-project 406 proposals, the 
policy dramatically increases workload for state and local governments, slowing recovery efforts 
and diverting resources from critical disaster response activities. The expansion of the applicant 
pool to include local governments and nonprofits, while well-intentioned, strains already limited 
state resources and complicates coordination efforts. Moreover, the imposition of complex 
compliance requirements for building and energy codes adds another layer of bureaucracy, 
making it difficult for many communities to participate fully. Perhaps most concerning is the risk 
of deobligations years after project completion due to cost fluctuations or miscalculations, which 

 
4 
 
introduces long-term financial uncertainty for communities struggling to rebuild. These 
administrative hurdles disproportionately affect disadvantaged and under-resourced 
communities, potentially widening the gap in disaster preparedness and recovery capabilities 
across the nation. 
 
Equity and Accessibility Issues 
 
Disadvantaged communities will face significant challenges meeting the interim policy’s 
requirements. Expanding the applicant pool to local governments and nonprofits burdens states 
with additional administrative and financial responsibilities, stretching limited resources and 
exacerbating inequities in disaster resilience. The complex 406 proposal process will likely deter 
participation, especially in under-resourced communities. 
 
Coupling energy codes with hazard-resistant codes adds further strain on disadvantaged 
jurisdictions, which often lack the workforce, funding, or expertise to implement these codes. 
This widens the gap between well-funded and resource-limited communities. Additionally, 
nonprofits, not structured to manage regulatory compliance, face challenges that divert focus 
from their core missions. Without providing greater technical assistance, FEMA risks deepening 
existing inequalities in disaster preparedness and response. 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
There are several ways to align the interim policy with Congressional intent and make it more 
accessible while reducing the public burden in its implementation, particularly for under-
resourced communities that may struggle with the administrative complexity of the current 
approach. Below are our recommendations to enhance accessibility and reduce the administrative 
burden of the interim policy. 
 
Incorporate the criteria outlined in the Bipartisan Budget Act of 2018 and engage 
stakeholders to determine how to operationalize the technical criterion. FEMA should 
consider the provisions outlined in the BBA of 2018 as they were the intent of Congress. These 
bipartisan provisions were thoroughly researched, vetted, and debated. FEMA should consider a 
range of options to reward states for proactively investing in their own resilience, with a cap of 
10%. For instance, each criterion could be assigned a 2%-5% increase, with the total not 
exceeding 10%, allowing for States to implement resilience measures that would be most 
impactful for their specific hazards. For smaller or resource-limited communities, the financial 
burden of meeting the requirements for the 10% cost-share increase — especially when coupled 
with building and energy code adoption — may be prohibitive. FEMA could consider offering 
more flexible cost-share arrangements for communities with limited financial capacity, such as 
tiered or scaled incentives based on the size of the community or the level of local resources. 
This would ensure that communities are not excluded from the program due to financial 
constraints. 
 
 Mitigation Plans: FEMA should consider the adoption of enhanced mitigation plans as an 
alternative to the mitigation plans criterion. 
 Investments in Disaster Relief and Emergency Management Programs: Rather than 
focusing primarily on post-disaster recovery through 406, FEMA should consider 

 
5 
 
incentivizing investments in comprehensive state emergency management programs, such as 
statewide disaster relief funds, early warning systems, prepositioned contracts, disaster 
response training, and coordinated resilience planning. 
 Investments in Insurance: We must break the cycle of taxpayers footing the bill for self-
insured recovery. Measuring insurance and offering cost-share incentives is straightforward, 
as key metrics like coverage rates and insurance-to-loss ratios can assess a state’s resilience 
effectiveness. The insurance industry has also developed solutions such as parametric 
products that can provide additional coverage options for communities and infrastructure. 
Many subject matter experts in the insurance and resilience fields are ready to work with 
FEMA to operationalize this approach to incentive resilience and close the insurance gap. 
 Decouple Energy Code Requirements: To honor the original intent of the law — promoting 
hazard-resistant building codes to mitigate disaster risks and reduce recovery costs — FEMA 
should separate energy code requirements from hazard-resistant codes. If energy efficiency 
remains a priority, it should be addressed as a distinct incentive criterion, ensuring that efforts 
to enhance disaster resilience are not burdened by unrelated compliance requirements. 
 Building Codes and Beyond: The final policy should reference FEMA’s Consensus-based 
Codes and Standards, Version 3 policy to promote consistency among the Public Assistance 
Program and accommodate the diverse needs of communities as well as cover resilience of 
critical infrastructure, including the electric grid, water systems, roads and bridges. A more 
holistic approach that includes these elements would help ensure that communities can 
maintain connectivity and functionality in the aftermath of a disaster. Incentives could be 
provided for communities that implement resilience measures for infrastructure — such as 
elevating roads, reinforcing bridges, or improving flood barriers — that go beyond the scope 
of traditional building codes. 
 Community Rating System (CRS): Participation in CRS is another powerful tool for 
incentivizing preparedness and resilience. The CRS rewards communities that take proactive 
steps to reduce flood risks, such as adopting stronger building codes, investing in floodplain 
management, and implementing public outreach programs. The final policy should consider 
offering enhanced cost-share incentives for communities that actively engage in the CRS, 
particularly those that target improvements in floodplain management and mitigation efforts. 
This would help communities reduce long-term insurance costs and incentivize resilience 
measures tailored to local needs. 
 Funding mitigation projects or granting tax incentives for projects that reduce risk: 
FEMA already possesses a robust system for gathering crucial information on states’ 
investments in resilience through its comprehensive state capability assessments. These 
assessments provide a holistic view of each state’s mitigation landscape, encompassing 
everything from laws and regulations to funding mechanisms and tax incentives. By 
encouraging states to conduct these thorough evaluations, FEMA gains invaluable insights 
into both FEMA and non-FEMA programs supporting mitigation efforts, effectively 
capturing the full spectrum of a state’s commitment to resilience. The agency’s data-driven 
approach, which includes tracking total investments in mitigation projects and assessing the 
benefit-to-cost ratio of Hazard Mitigation Grants, allows FEMA to quantify the tangible 
impacts of various initiatives. This existing framework not only provides a clear picture of 
current state-level resilience investments but also promotes a culture of proactive mitigation 
by encouraging states to identify and address gaps in their efforts. Given that FEMA already 
collects this vital information through its well-established assessment processes, 

 
6 
 
implementing additional reporting requirements or creating new systems to track state 
investments in resilience would be redundant and unnecessary. The current capability 
assessments offer a comprehensive and efficient means of evaluating states’ commitment to 
and progress in building resilience, enabling FEMA to make informed decisions about a 
state’s resource allocation and strategy refinement without imposing additional bureaucratic 
burdens on states or the agency itself. 
 
Remove the 406 proposal requirement completely from the final policy. The inclusion of the 
406 proposal is problematic because it prioritizes postdisaster recovery over proactive mitigation, 
imposes significant financial risk and administrative burdens on communities, and creates 
barriers for underfunded jurisdictions. Instead of promoting long-term resilience, it reinforces a 
cycle of reactive disaster recovery that ultimately increases federal spending while failing to 
reward proactive investments. This gateway requirement to access the extra incentive for 
building codes is problematic in the following ways: 
 
 The 406 proposal requirement that mitigation costs meet or exceed 20% of eligible project 
costs exposes communities to financial risks and potential de-obligation years or even 
decades later, creating uncertainty and unexpected shortfalls, especially if costs fluctuate over 
time. 
 The 406 proposal involves a complex, project-by-project approval process that increases 
administrative workload and slows recovery, particularly for smaller, under-resourced 
communities with limited capacity. 
 By focusing on post-disaster funding, the 406 proposal promotes a reactive approach via the 
recovery process instead of incentivizing proactive, pre-disaster mitigation that could reduce 
future risks and promote long-term resilience. 
 The 406 program’s complexity and financial risks disproportionately burden smaller or 
underfunded communities, exacerbating inequities in disaster recovery as wealthier 
communities are better positioned to comply with its requirements. 
 The intricate cost-sharing rules and administrative burdens of the 406 proposal often deter 
states and local governments from participating, resulting in missed opportunities for 
mitigation funding and reducing the program’s overall impact. 
 The 406 proposal fails to address the root causes of ineffective mitigation, such as inadequate 
planning, coordination, and long-term investments, focusing instead on reactive post-disaster 
response. 
Simplify the application process and re-focus the applicant pool. The interim policy’s 
project-by-project submission requirement creates an overwhelming administrative burden, 
especially for small or underfunded communities. FEMA should allow states to submit a single, 
comprehensive plan, reducing complexity and streamlining the process. Standardized templates 
and clear guidance would further ease compliance. Additionally, limiting the applicant pool to 
states, as originally intended by Congress, would reduce administrative challenges and align with 
the focus on broader resilience efforts. FEMA could enhance support by offering annual training 
to state applicants, rather than managing individual project worksheets for each applicant for 
each disaster declaration. To realign the final policy with the original intent of the law, local 
governments and nonprofits should not be eligible for the cost share increase.  
 

 
7 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
The current interim policy falls short of its intended goal to incentivize meaningful, proactive 
state investments in disaster resilience. By prioritizing postdisaster compliance over predisaster 
mitigation, overlooking successful state-led resilience programs, neglecting critical 
infrastructure, and failing to recognize the full spectrum of emergency management efforts, the 
policy fails to address the root causes of vulnerability and exacerbate existing inequalities. A 
recent economic study, by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce 
Foundation, and Allstate, called the Preparedness Payoff found that for every $1 invested in 
resilience and predisaster mitigation projects and measures, there is $13 in reduced losses and 
economic savings.5 To truly take advantage of this economic opportunity, reduce federal disaster 
costs, and enhance the nation’s resilience, FEMA must refocus its approach on incentivizing 
predisaster investments, supporting state innovation, and addressing the broad array of 
infrastructure and programs that contribute to long-term community safety and sustainability.  
 
We urge FEMA to revise the interim policy to ensure it effectively promotes a forward-thinking 
and comprehensive strategy for disaster risk reduction — one that empowers states, preserves 
and considers successful programs, and prioritizes the mitigation measures necessary to protect 
all communities. We would welcome the opportunity to meet with your office to provide 
comprehensive resources and further discuss the path toward a measured implementation of a 
successful policy. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
BuildStrong America 
International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) 
Marsh McLennan 
National Institute of Building Sciences (NIBS) 
Precast/Prestressed Concrete Institute 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce 
 
 
 
 
5 U.S. Chamber of Commerce, U.S. Chamber of Commerce Foundation, & Allstate. (2024). Preparedness 
payoƯ. Retrieved from uschamber.com/assets/documents/USChamber_AllState-2024-Climate-Resiliency-
Report.pdf

--- COMMENT ID: FEMA-2024-0029-0078 AND DOCKET ID: FEMA-2024-0029 ---
1201 15th Street NW  |  Washington, DC  20005  |  T 202 266 8200  |  800 368 5242  |  nahb.org 
Susan Asmus 
Senior Vice President, Regulatory Affairs  
sasmus@nahb.org 
January 29, 2025 
Robert Pesapane 
Director, Public Assistance Division 
Office of Response and Recovery 
DHS/FEMA 
500 C St. SW 
Washington, DC 20472-3020 
 
Submitted via Regulations.gov 
FEMA Interim Policy FP-104-24-002: Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy 
 
Dear Mr. Pesapane, 
The National Association of Home Builders of the United States (NAHB) appreciates the opportunity 
to comment on the Federal Emergency Management Agency’s (FEMA) proposed policy “Public 
Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives” that was published in the Federal Register on October 1, 
2024.  
NAHB is a Washington, D.C.-based trade association representing more than 700 affiliated state and 
local associations across all fifty states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. NAHB’s members 
are involved in designing, supplying, and constructing single-family homes, building and managing 
multifamily projects, and remodeling existing homes. Our builders are proud to construct over 80 
percent of all housing units produced each year.  
As builders of housing and related community infrastructure and amenities, NAHB and its members 
have a vital interest in ensuring that governmental programs and policies enable them to provide a 
wide range of housing opportunities at all price points. Given the existing housing affordability 
challenges, NAHB remains attentive to any federal agency actions that may be taken without full 
consideration of their impacts, as this could cause disruption to the housing market and impact the 
ability of our members to produce new attainable housing.  
 
I. 
Background 
 
Section 406 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (Stafford Act), as 
amended, authorizes the President to provide financial assistance to eligible applicants for the repair, 
restoration, reconstruction, or replacement of facilities damaged by a major disaster, with a minimum 
Federal cost share of 75%. This section was amended in 2018 to include Section 406(b)(3), which 
allows FEMA to increase the minimum federal cost share for measures that enhance preparedness and 
resilience against future disasters. 
 
The interim Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy (“Interim Policy” or “policy”) 
directly implements Section 406(b)(3). This policy applies to Public Assistance (PA)-eligible 
applicants, which include State, local, Tribal, and Territorial governments, along with certain private 

National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) 
Comments on FEMA Interim Policy FP-104-24-002: Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy 
Page 2 
 
1201 15th Street NW | Washington, DC  20005 | T 202 266 8200  | 800 368 5242 | nahb.org 
nonprofit organizations. It provides guidance on eligible measures that meet FEMA's criteria for 
increasing the federal cost share up to 85%, aiming to promote disaster resilience and preparedness. 
 
According to the policy, applicants can qualify for a 10% increase in the federal cost share for 
permanent work projects if the total cost of the Hazard Mitigation Proposal is equal to or greater than 
20% of the total eligible repair/restoration cost of the project, and the applicant adopts the 2024 edition 
or the previous 2021 edition of the International Building Code (IBC) and the International Energy 
Conservation Code (IECC) for commercial buildings or an equivalent code, such as the ASHRAE 90.1 
standard.  
 
While NAHB appreciates the attempt to provide additional funding for disaster mitigation, we remain 
concerned that the Interim Policy is unclear, exceeds FEMA’s authority, will negatively impact post-
construction rebuilding efforts, and exacerbate the current housing affordability crises. In an effort to 
minimize these impacts, NAHB urges the agency to abandon the energy code requirement. At a 
minimum, the application of the energy code requirement must be limited to the authorized PA 
projects. 
 
II. 
Extent of Policy Unclear 
 
In order to be eligible for a 10% cost share increase, applicants must meet both conditions identified 
above, including the adoption of one of the two most recent energy codes. It is not clear, however, 
whether FEMA intends for the applicant to adopt the latest energy code for the entire jurisdiction or 
just the affected project.  
PA-eligible applicants may include State, local, Tribal, and Territorial governments, and certain 
private nonprofit organizations, yet only a subset of those entities has the authority to adopt and 
enforce energy codes. As a result, requiring the code’s adoption jurisdiction-wide would create a 
disadvantage for those applicants who do not have code adoption authority, as they would never be 
able to reach the 10% increase. Further, adopting the code state- or community-wide would present 
significant challenges. These communities, already grappling with housing affordability challenges, 
may face significant difficulties navigating the learning curve of the new requirements, along with the 
added burden of increased inspections, enforcement, and higher construction and compliance costs 
tied to these energy codes, all of which could hinder their ability to secure a cost share increase. This 
concern is particularly relevant given the financial burden that these codes impose on the construction 
of affordable housing and the reconstruction of communities after disasters. If the energy code 
requirement is retained, NAHB strongly urges FEMA to limit its application to the affected project. 
III. 
Impact of Increased Energy Codes on Housing Affordability and Disaster Recovery 
 
Communities are already grappling with the challenges of housing affordability, and the adoption of 
the 2021 or 2024 IECC will only add to these burdens. The financial and logistical challenges posed 
by the increased construction costs associated with the 2021 or 2024 IECC are particularly profound 
for multifamily housing, which is already a critical area of focus for providing affordable housing 
options in these communities. 
 
As the cost of building both single-family and multifamily housing increases due to stricter energy 
codes, the financial burden falls squarely on builders, developers, and ultimately homebuyers and 

National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) 
Comments on FEMA Interim Policy FP-104-24-002: Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy 
Page 3 
 
1201 15th Street NW | Washington, DC  20005 | T 202 266 8200  | 800 368 5242 | nahb.org 
renters. Studies have shown that for every $1,000 increase in construction costs, nearly 20,000 renters 
are priced out of affordable housing.1 This phenomenon disproportionately impacts disadvantaged 
communities, exacerbating the existing housing affordability crisis and pushing already struggling 
families further from the goal of housing stability. 
 
The housing affordability crisis is one of the most pressing issues facing our nation today. In 
particular, the lack of affordable multifamily housing options is a major concern for all communities 
and is particularly acute for those communities that are economically vulnerable. Imposing higher 
construction costs through increased energy codes, risks further widening the gap between the demand 
for affordable housing and its availability. Builders will be forced to pass on these added costs to 
tenants in the form of higher rents, or worse, may abandon projects altogether, leading to even fewer 
affordable housing units being built in the first place, making it harder for low-income households to 
access safe, affordable housing and forcing families to remain in older, less resilient homes. 
 
Additionally, the increased costs stemming from energy code compliance also present a serious 
challenge when it comes to rebuilding single-family homes and multifamily housing following natural 
disasters. Disaster recovery is an already expensive and time-consuming process, and adding energy 
code requirements that increase construction costs only compounds the difficulty. After a disaster, 
communities already must rebuild infrastructure, restore public services, and provide emergency 
shelter, among countless other tasks. Mandating compliance with energy codes that may require 
retraining, removes the focus from the immediate needs, and increases construction costs will further 
strain already limited recovery resources. Further, since few households purchase insurance policies 
that provide additional building code coverage, homeowners must bear the full cost of compliance 
with new codes as part of any significant repair or reconstruction, making rebuilding all the more 
difficult and costly.  
 
The very purpose of the Interim Policy is to increase readiness for, and resilience from, major 
disasters.  Requiring compliance with the latest energy code fails to further these goals and will have a 
significant impact on the ability of builders to provide attainable housing options and for families to 
afford a safe and decent home. FEMA’s policies must promote resilience, but not at the expense of the 
communities and families that it serves. To ensure the most effective and efficient use of its limited 
mitigation funds, FEMA is urged to abandon the energy code requirement.   
 
IV. 
Energy Efficiency vs. Structural Resiliency 
 
While energy efficiency measures can help reduce operational costs and minimize environmental 
impacts, they do not address the core issue of structural resiliency in the face of natural disasters. 
Energy codes like the 2021 and 2024 IECC primarily focus on reducing energy consumption, not 
enhancing the ability of buildings to withstand the physical forces of hurricanes, floods, wildfires, or 
other catastrophic events. This is a crucial distinction—FEMA’s mission is about protecting 
communities by ensuring that structures can endure these physical challenges and continue to provide 
shelter and safety for their occupants in the aftermath of a disaster, not conserving energy. The 
 
1 Based on the 2018 median rent of $2,189, a $1000 increase in the cost of building a new apartment unit would price 
out 19,617 renters. See Testimony of Dr. Robert Dietz on Behalf of the National Association of Home Builders Before the 
Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee Hearing on “The State of Housing 2023” (Dietz Testimony 2-9-
23.pdf (senate.gov) accessed 8/4/23). 

National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) 
Comments on FEMA Interim Policy FP-104-24-002: Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy 
Page 4 
 
1201 15th Street NW | Washington, DC  20005 | T 202 266 8200  | 800 368 5242 | nahb.org 
principles of this Policy further bear this out, as it is intended to incentivize hazard mitigation, reduce 
vulnerabilities to future disasters, and enhance readiness and resilience.  
 
Energy efficiency standards do not fortify buildings or improve their resistance to natural forces. They 
do not make structures more resilient to wind, flooding, or wildfires. It is therefore misguided to tie 
disaster recovery funding to standards that do not directly impact the strength or durability of 
structures in the face of such hazards. FEMA’s focus should remain on measures that directly 
contribute to the physical resiliency of buildings and infrastructure.  
 
Further, imposing energy efficiency requirements as part of disaster recovery and mitigation funding 
risks diverting resources away from critical resilience measures. In disaster-prone areas, the primary 
concern must be ensuring that buildings can endure and withstand natural disasters. Energy codes that 
do not improve structural durability should not be a part of FEMA’s cost-share incentives. These 
measures do not provide immediate benefits in terms of disaster recovery or resilience, and as such, 
should be removed from consideration within FEMA’s disaster relief funding.  NAHB strongly urges 
FEMA to remove the energy codes requirement. 
 
V. 
Unauthorized Burden on Private Stakeholders 
 
FEMA’s public assistance funds are specifically designed to support public buildings and 
infrastructure that contribute directly to the safety, recovery, and resiliency of communities after a 
disaster. These funds are not intended for private development. However, by encouraging communities 
to adopt stringent energy codes like the 2021 or 2024 IECC to increase the amount of federal funding 
they may receive, FEMA is improperly seeking to expand its reach to a subset of structures and 
projects for which it has no statutory authority and that are in no way related to the public assistance 
provided by this policy.  
 
This is because if a state or community adopts a more stringent energy code, that more stringent code 
must be met by all the structures within the community, not just those receiving PA funding. As a 
result, FEMA’s requirement places a significant financial burden onto private stakeholders—such as 
owners, developers, and builders who must now comply with the revised code. The increased costs of 
complying with the 2021 or 2024 IECC, which can be significant, are then passed on to consumers in 
the form of higher rents or home prices, exacerbating the housing affordability crisis, particularly in 
disadvantaged communities. Unlike public projects that may benefit from PA funding, private 
stakeholders receive no additional financial resources or assistance to offset these compliance costs. 
 
Not only is FEMA’s suggested reach unlawful, it also creates a situation where private entities are left 
to absorb the full weight of energy code requirements, without the relief or incentives that public 
projects benefit from through FEMA’s assistance. Furthermore, because energy efficiency measures 
do little to directly improve a building’s ability to withstand natural disasters and few, if any insurance 
companies provide discounts for increased energy efficiency the way some discounts are available for 
structural or other life safety improvements, these additional costs end up being merely transactional. 
To make matters worse, significantly increasing the total cost of construction by requiring compliance 
with stringent energy codes also increases the cost of property insurance, putting affordability even 
further out of reach for many homeowners.  
 
Adopting the latest energy code jurisdiction-wide for the purposes of PA mitigation places an unfair, 
disproportionate burden on private developers, builders, and owners—critical players in the rebuilding 

National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) 
Comments on FEMA Interim Policy FP-104-24-002: Public Assistance Mitigation Cost Share Incentives Policy 
Page 5 
 
1201 15th Street NW | Washington, DC  20005 | T 202 266 8200  | 800 368 5242 | nahb.org 
process—without providing the financial support necessary to recover the added costs. Rather than 
pushing communities to adopt energy codes that may hinder private development, FEMA should 
prioritize the implementation of disaster resiliency measures that directly strengthen buildings and 
infrastructure and improve their capacity to withstand future disasters. It should also heed its own 
principle from the Interim Policy, which states, “FEMA will: A. Incentivize communities to pursue 
and maximize hazard mitigation measures on PA Projects” (emphasis added). To better align this 
policy with FEMA’s goals and mission, and to limit unnecessary costs and requirements, NAHB urges 
FEMA to eliminate the energy codes requirement.  At a minimum, FEMA must limit the application 
of the 2021 or 2024 IECC to the PA project only. 
 
VI. 
Conclusion 
 
In light of these concerns and considerations, NAHB strongly urges FEMA to exclude energy 
efficiency as part of its resiliency strategy. Energy efficiency measures should not be tied to disaster 
recovery incentives. Instead, FEMA must prioritize actions that directly enhance building resiliency—
such as structural fortification and disaster mitigation—while addressing the disproportionate burden 
that increased construction costs place on single-family and apartment housing. A truly effective 
resiliency strategy must focus on physical durability and recovery capabilities, not on operational cost 
savings that do not contribute to disaster resilience. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to comment on this important policy. NAHB looks forward to working 
with FEMA to ensure that its policies effectively support the resiliency of communities while also 
addressing the affordability challenges faced by households across the country. If you have any 
questions or would like to discuss NAHB’s comments, please contact me at 
202 266-8538 or sasmus@nahb.org. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
Susan Asmus
